and are wholly neutralized, nullified and harmless if they are the

undisputed property of every individual in the nation.  I think I realize

that caste does not exist and cannot exist except by common consent of

the masses outside of its limits.  I thought caste created itself and

perpetuated itself; but it seems quite true that it only creates itself,

and is perpetuated by the people whom it despises, and who can dissolve

it at any time by assuming its mere sign-names themselves."



"It's what I think.  There isn't any power on earth that can prevent

England's thirty millions from electing themselves dukes and duchesses

to-morrow and calling themselves so.  And within six months all the

former dukes and duchesses would have retired from the business.

I wish they'd try that.  Royalty itself couldn't survive such a process.

A handful of frowners against thirty million laughers in a state of

irruption.  Why, it's Herculaneum against Vesuvius; it would take another

eighteen centuries to find that Herculaneum after the cataclysm.  What's

a Colonel in our South?  He's a nobody; because they're all colonels down

there.  No, Tracy" (shudder from Tracy) "nobody in England would call you

a gentleman and you wouldn't call yourself one; and I tell you it's a

state of things that makes a man put himself into most unbecoming

attitudes sometimes--the broad and general recognition and acceptance of

caste as caste does, I mean.  Makes him do it unconsciously--being bred

in him, you see, and never thought over and reasoned out.  You couldn't

conceive of the Matterhorn being flattered by the notice of one of your

comely little English hills, could you?"



"Why, no."



"Well, then, let a man in his right mind try to conceive of Darwin

feeling flattered by the notice of a princess.  It's so grotesque that

it--well, it paralyzes the imagination.  Yet that Memnon was flattered by

the notice of that statuette; he says so--says so himself.  The system

that can make a god disown his godship and profane it--oh, well, it's all

wrong, it's all wrong and ought to be abolished, I should say."



The mention of Darwin brought on a literary discussion, and this topic

roused such enthusiasm in Barrow that he took off his coat and made

himself the more free and comfortable for it, and detained him so long

that he was still at it when the noisy proprietors of the room came

shouting and skylarking in and began to romp, scuffle, wash, and

otherwise entertain themselves.  He lingered yet a little longer to offer

the hospitalities of his room and his book shelf to Tracy and ask him a

personal question or two:



"What is your trade?"



"They--well, they call me a cowboy, but that is a fancy.  I'm not that.

I haven't any trade."



"What do you work at for your living?"



Oh, anything--I mean I would work at, anything I could get to do, but

thus far I haven't been able to find an occupation."



"Maybe I can help you; I'd like to try."



"I shall be very glad.  I've tried, myself, to weariness."



"Well, of course where a man hasn't a regular trade he's pretty bad off

in this world.  What you needed, I reckon, was less book learning and

more bread-and-butter learning.  I don't know what your father could have

been thinking of.  You ought to have had a trade, you ought to have had a

trade, by all means.  But never mind about that; we'll stir up something

to do, I guess.  And don't you get homesick; that's a bad business.

We'll talk the thing over and look around a little.  You'll come out all

right.  Wait for me--I'll go down to supper with you."



By this time Tracy had achieved a very friendly feeling for Barrow and

would have called him a friend, maybe, if not taken too suddenly on a

straight-out requirement to realize on his theories.  He was glad of his

society, anyway, and was feeling lighter hearted than before.  Also he

was pretty curious to know what vocation it might be which had furnished

Barrow such a large acquaintanceship with books and allowed him so much

time to read.









CHAPTER XII.



Presently the supper bell began to ring in the depths of the house, and

the sound proceeded steadily upward, growing in intensity all the way up

towards the upper floors.  The higher it came the more maddening was the

noise, until at last what it lacked of being absolutely deafening, was

made up of the sudden crash and clatter of an avalanche of boarders down

the uncarpeted stairway.  The peerage did not go to meals in this

fashion; Tracy's training had not fitted him to enjoy this hilarious

zoological clamor and enthusiasm.  He had to confess that there was

something about this extraordinary outpouring of animal spirits which he

would have to get inured to before he could accept it.  No doubt in time

he would prefer it; but he wished the process might be modified and made

just a little more gradual, and not quite so pronounced and violent.

Barrow and Tracy followed the avalanche down through an ever increasing

and ever more and more aggressive stench of bygone cabbage and kindred

smells; smells which are to be found nowhere but in a cheap private

boarding house; smells which once encountered can never be forgotten;

smells which encountered generations later are instantly recognizable,

but never recognizable with pleasure.  To Tracy these odors were

suffocating, horrible, almost unendurable; but he held his peace and said

nothing.  Arrived in the basement, they entered a large dining-room where

thirty-five or forty people sat at a long table.  They took their places.

The feast had already begun and the conversation was going on in the

liveliest way from one end of the table to the other.  The table cloth

was of very coarse material and was liberally spotted with coffee stains

and grease.  The knives and forks were iron, with bone handles, the

spoons appeared to be iron or sheet iron or something of the sort.

The tea and coffee cups were of the commonest and heaviest and most

durable stone ware.  All the furniture of the table was of the commonest

and cheapest sort.  There was a single large thick slice of bread by each

boarder's plate, and it was observable that he economized it as if he

were not expecting it to be duplicated.  Dishes of butter were

distributed along the table within reach of people's arms, if they had

long ones, but there were no private butter plates.  The butter was

perhaps good enough, and was quiet and well behaved; but it had more

bouquet than was necessary, though nobody commented upon that fact or

seemed in any way disturbed by it.  The main feature of the feast was a

piping hot Irish stew made of the potatoes and meat left over from a

procession of previous meals.  Everybody was liberally supplied with this

dish.  On the table were a couple of great dishes of sliced ham, and

there were some other eatables of minor importance--preserves and New

Orleans molasses and such things.  There was also plenty of tea and

coffee of an infernal sort, with brown sugar and condensed milk, but the

milk and sugar supply was not left at the discretion of the boarders, but

was rationed out at headquarters--one spoonful of sugar and one of

condensed milk to each cup and no more.  The table was waited upon by two

stalwart negro women who raced back and forth from the bases of supplies

with splendid dash and clatter and energy.  Their labors were

supplemented after a fashion by the young girl Puss.  She carried coffee

and tea back and forth among the boarders, but she made pleasure

excursions rather than business ones in this way, to speak strictly.

She made jokes with various people.  She chaffed the young men pleasantly

and wittily, as she supposed, and as the rest also supposed, apparently,

judging by the applause and laughter which she got by her efforts.

Manifestly she was a favorite with most of the young fellows and

sweetheart of the rest of them.  Where she conferred notice she conferred

happiness, as was seen by the face of the recipient; and; at the same

time she conferred unhappiness--one could see it fall and dim the faces

of the other young fellows like a shadow.  She never "Mistered" these

friends of hers, but called them "Billy," "Tom," "John," and they called

her "Puss" or "Hattie."



Mr. Marsh sat at the head of the table, his wife sat at the foot.  Marsh

was a man of sixty, and was an American; but if he had been born a month

earlier he would have been a Spaniard.  He was plenty good enough

Spaniard as it was; his face was very dark, his hair very black, and his

eyes were not only exceedingly black but were very intense, and there was

something about them that indicated that they could burn with passion

upon occasion.  He was stoop-shouldered and lean-faced, and the general

aspect of him was disagreeable; he was evidently not a very companionable

person.  If looks went for anything, he was the very opposite of his

wife, who was all motherliness and charity, good will and good nature.

All the young men and the women called her Aunt Rachael, which was

another sign.  Tracy's wandering and interested eye presently fell upon

one boarder who had been overlooked in the distribution of the stew.

He was very pale and looked as if he had but lately come out of a sick

bed, and also as if he ought to get back into it again as soon as

possible.  His face was very melancholy.  The waves of laughter and

conversation broke upon it without affecting it any more than if it had

been a rock in the sea and the words and the laughter veritable waters.

He held his head down and looked ashamed.  Some of the women cast glances

of pity toward him from time to time in a furtive and half afraid way,

and some of the youngest of the men plainly had compassion on the young

fellow--a compassion exhibited in their faces but not in any more active

or compromising way.  But the great majority of the people present showed

entire indifference to the youth and his sorrows.  Marsh sat with his

head down, but one could catch the malicious gleam of his eyes through

his shaggy brows.  He was watching that young fellow with evident relish.

He had not neglected him through carelessness, and apparently the table

understood that fact.  The spectacle was making Mrs. Marsh very

uncomfortable.  She had the look of one who hopes against hope that the

impossible may happen.  But as the impossible did not happen, she finally

ventured to speak up and remind her husband that Nat Brady hadn't been

helped to the Irish stew.



Marsh lifted his head and gasped out with mock courtliness, "Oh, he

hasn't, hasn't he?  What a pity that is.  I don't know how I came to

overlook him.  Ah, he must pardon me.  You must indeed Mr--er--Baxter--

Barker, you must pardon me.  I--er--my attention was directed to some

other matter, I don't know what.  The thing that grieves me mainly is,

that it happens every meal now.  But you must try to overlook these

little things, Mr. Bunker, these little neglects on my part.  They're

always likely to happen with me in any case, and they are especially

likely to happen where a person has--er--well, where a person is, say,

about three weeks in arrears for his board.  You get my meaning?--you get

my idea?  Here is your Irish stew, and--er--it gives me the greatest

pleasure to send it to you, and I hope that you will enjoy the charity as

much as I enjoy conferring it."



A blush rose in Brady's white cheeks and flowed slowly backward to his

ears and upward toward his forehead, but he said nothing and began to eat

his food under the embarrassment of a general silence and the sense that

all eyes were fastened upon him.  Barrow whispered to Tracy:



"The old man's been waiting for that.  He wouldn't have missed that

chance for anything."



"It's a brutal business," said Tracy.  Then he said to himself, purposing

to set the thought down in his diary later:



"Well, here in this very house is a republic where all are free and

equal, if men are free and equal anywhere in the earth, therefore I have

arrived at the place I started to find, and I am a man among men, and on

the strictest equality possible to men, no doubt.  Yet here on the

threshold I find an inequality.  There are people at this table who are

looked up to for some reason or another, and here is a poor devil of a

boy who is looked down upon, treated with indifference, and shamed by

humiliations, when he has committed no crime but that common one of being

poor.  Equality ought to make men noble-minded.  In fact I had supposed

it did do that."



After supper, Barrow proposed a walk, and they started.  Barrow had a

purpose.  He wanted Tracy to get rid of that cowboy hat.  He didn't see

his way to finding mechanical or manual employment for a person rigged in

that fashion.  Barrow presently said:



"As I understand it, you're not a cowboy."



"No, I'm not."



"Well, now if you will not think me too curious, how did you come to

mount that hat?  Where'd you get it?"



Tracy didn't know quite how to reply to this, but presently said,



"Well, without going into particulars; I exchanged clothes with a

stranger under stress of weather, and I would like to find him and

re-exchange."



"Well, why don't you find him?  Where is he?"



"I don't know.  I supposed the best way to find him would be to continue

to wear his clothes, which are conspicuous enough to attract his

attention if I should meet him on the street."



"Oh, very well," said Barrow, "the rest of the outfit, is well enough,

and while it's not too conspicuous, it isn't quite like the clothes that

anybody else wears.  Suppress the hat.  When you meet your man he'll

recognize the rest of his suit.  That's a mighty embarrassing hat, you

know, in a centre of civilization like this.  I don't believe an angel

could get employment in Washington in a halo like that."



Tracy agreed to replace the hat with something of a modester form, and

they stepped aboard a crowded car and stood with others on the rear

platform.  Presently, as the car moved swiftly along the rails, two men

crossing the street caught sight of the backs of Barrow and Tracy, and

both exclaimed at once, "There he is!"  It was Sellers and Hawkins.

Both were so paralyzed with joy that before they could pull themselves

together and make an effort to stop the car, it was gone too far,

and they decided to wait for the next one.  They waited a while; then

it occurred to Washington that there could be no use in chasing one

horse-car with another, and he wanted to hunt up a hack.  But the

Colonel said:



"When you come to think of it, there's no occasion for that at all.

Now that I've got him materialized, I can command his motions.  I'll have

him at the house by the time we get there."



Then they hurried off home in a state of great and joyful excitement.



The hat exchange accomplished, the two new friends started to walk back

leisurely to the boarding house.  Barrow's mind was full of curiosity

about this young fellow.  He said,



"You've never been to the Rocky Mountains?"



"No."



"You've never been out on the plains?"



"No."



"How long have you been in this country?"



"Only a few days."



"You've never been in America before?"



Then Barrow communed with himself.  "Now what odd shapes the notions of

romantic people take.  Here's a young, fellow who's read in England about

cowboys and adventures on the plains.  He comes here and buys a cowboy's

suit.  Thinks he can play himself on folks for a cowboy,

all inexperienced as he is.  Now the minute he's caught in this poor

little game, he's ashamed of it and ready to retire from it.  It is that

exchange that he has put up as an explanation.  It's rather thin,

too thin altogether.  Well, he's young, never been anywhere, knows

nothing about the world, sentimental, no doubt.  Perhaps it was the

natural thing for him to do, but it was a most singular choice, curious

freak, altogether."



Both men were busy with their thoughts for a time, then Tracy heaved a

sigh and said,



"Mr. Barrow, the case of that young fellow troubles me."



"You mean Nat Brady?"



"Yes, Brady, or Baxter, or whatever it was.  The old landlord called him

by several different names."



"Oh, yes, he has been very liberal with names for Brady, since Brady fell

into arrears for his board.  Well, that's one of his sarcasms--the old

man thinks he's great on sarcasm."



"Well, what is Brady's difficulty?  What is Brady--who is he?"



"Brady is a tinner.  He's a young journeyman tinner who was getting along

all right till he fell sick and lost his job.  He was very popular before

he lost his job; everybody in the house liked Brady.  The old man was

rather especially fond of him, but you know that when a man loses his job

and loses his ability to support himself and to pay his way as he goes,

it makes a great difference in the way people look at him and feel about

him."



"Is that so!  Is it so?"



Barrow looked at Tracy in a puzzled way.  "Why of course it's so.

Wouldn't you know that, naturally.  Don't you know that the wounded deer

is always attacked and killed by its companions and friends?"



Tracy said to himself, while a chilly and boding discomfort spread itself

through his system, "In a republic of deer and men where all are free and

equal, misfortune is a crime, and the prosperous gore the unfortunate to

death."  Then he said aloud, "Here in the boarding house, if one would

have friends and be popular instead of having the cold shoulder turned

upon him, he must be prosperous."



"Yes," Barrow said, "that is so.  It's their human nature.  They do turn

against Brady, now that he's unfortunate, and they don't like him as well

as they did before; but it isn't because of any lack in Brady--he's just

as he was before, has the same nature and the same impulses, but they--

well, Brady is a thorn in their consciences, you see.  They know they

ought to help him and they're too stingy to do it, and they're ashamed of

themselves for that, and they ought also to hate themselves on that

account, but instead of that they hate Brady because he makes them

ashamed of themselves.  I say that's human nature; that occurs

everywhere; this boarding house is merely the world in little, it's the

case all over--they're all alike.  In prosperity we are popular;

popularity comes easy in that case, but when the other thing comes our

friends are pretty likely to turn against us."



Tracy's noble theories and high purposes were beginning to feel pretty

damp and clammy.  He wondered if by any possibility he had made a mistake

in throwing his own prosperity to the winds and taking up the cross

of other people's unprosperity.  But he wouldn't listen to that sort of

thing; he cast it out of his mind and resolved to go ahead resolutely

along the course he had mapped out for himself.



Extracts from his diary:



Have now spent several days in this singular hive.  I don't know quite

what to make out of these people.  They have merits and virtues, but they

have some other qualities, and some ways that are hard to get along with.

I can't enjoy them.  The moment I appeared in a hat of the period,

I noticed a change.  The respect which had been paid me before, passed

suddenly away, and the people became friendly--more than that--they

became familiar, and I'm not used to familiarity, and can't take to it

right off; I find that out.  These people's familiarity amounts to

impudence, sometimes.  I suppose it's all right; no doubt I can get used

to it, but it's not a satisfactory process at all.  I have accomplished

my dearest wish, I am a man among men, on an equal footing with Tom, Dick

and Harry, and yet it isn't just exactly what I thought it was going to

be.  I--I miss home.  Am obliged to say I am homesick.  Another thing--

and this is a confession--a reluctant one, but I will make it: The thing

I miss most and most severely, is the respect, the deference, with which

I was treated all my life in England, and which seems to be somehow

necessary to me.  I get along very well without the luxury and the wealth

and the sort of society I've been accustomed to, but I do miss the

respect and can't seem to get reconciled to the absence of it.  There is

respect, there is deference here, but it doesn't fall to my share.  It is

lavished on two men.  One of them is a portly man of middle age who is a

retired plumber.  Everybody is pleased to have that man's notice.

He's full of pomp and circumstance and self complacency and bad grammar,

and at table he is Sir Oracle and when he opens his mouth not any

dog in the kennel barks.  The other person is a policeman at the

capitol-building.  He represents the government.  The deference paid to

these two men is not so very far short of that which is paid to an earl

in England, though the method of it differs.  Not so much courtliness,

but the deference is all there.



Yes, and there is obsequiousness, too.



It does rather look as if in a republic where all are free and equal,

prosperity and position constitute rank.









CHAPTER XIII.



The days drifted by, and they grew ever more dreary.  For Barrow's

efforts to find work for Tracy were unavailing.  Always the first

question asked was, "What Union do you belong to?"



Tracy was obliged to reply that he didn't belong to any trade-union.



"Very well, then, it's impossible to employ you.  My men wouldn't stay

with me if I should employ a 'scab,' or 'rat,'" or whatever the phrase

was.



Finally, Tracy had a happy thought.  He said, "Why the thing for me to

do, of course, is to join a trade-union."



"Yes," Barrow said, "that is the thing for you to do--if you can."



"If I can?  Is it difficult?"



"Well, Yes," Barrow said, "it's sometimes difficult--in fact, very

difficult.  But you can try, and of course it will be best to try."



Therefore Tracy tried; but he did not succeed.  He was refused admission

with a good deal of promptness, and was advised to go back home, where he

belonged, not come here taking honest men's bread out of their mouths.

Tracy began to realize that the situation was desperate, and the thought

made him cold to the marrow.  He said to himself, "So there is an

aristocracy of position here, and an aristocracy of prosperity, and

apparently there is also an aristocracy of the ins as opposed to the

outs, and I am with the outs.  So the ranks grow daily, here.  Plainly

there are all kinds of castes here and only one that I belong to, the

outcasts."  But he couldn't even smile at his small joke, although he was

obliged to confess that he had a rather good opinion of it.  He was

feeling so defeated and miserable by this time that he could no longer

look with philosophical complacency on the horseplay of the young fellows

in the upper rooms at night.  At first it had been pleasant to see them

unbend and have a good time after having so well earned it by the labors

of the day, but now it all rasped upon his feelings and his dignity.

He lost patience with the spectacle.  When they were feeling good, they

shouted, they scuffled, they sang songs, they romped about the place like

cattle, and they generally wound up with a pillow fight, in which they

banged each other over the head, and threw the pillows in all directions,

and every now and then he got a buffet himself; and they were always

inviting him to join in.  They called him "Johnny Bull," and invited him

with excessive familiarity to take a hand.  At first he had endured all

this with good nature, but latterly he had shown by his manner that it

was distinctly distasteful to him, and very soon he saw a change in the

manner of these young people toward him.  They were souring on him as

they would have expressed it in their language.  He had never been what

might be called popular.  That was hardly the phrase for it; he had

merely been liked, but now dislike for him was growing.  His case was not

helped by the fact that he was out of luck, couldn't get work, didn't

belong to a union, and couldn't gain admission to one.  He got a good many

slights of that small ill-defined sort that you can't quite put your

finger on, and it was manifest that there was only one thing which

protected him from open insult, and that was his muscle.  These young

people had seen him exercising, mornings, after his cold sponge bath,

and they had perceived by his performance and the build of his body,

that he was athletic, and also versed in boxing.  He felt pretty naked

now, recognizing that he was shorn of all respect except respect for his

fists.  One night when he entered his room he found about a dozen of the

young fellows there carrying on a very lively conversation punctuated

with horse-laughter.  The talking ceased instantly, and the frank affront

of a dead silence followed.  He said,



"Good evening gentlemen," and sat down.



There was no response.  He flushed to the temples but forced himself to

maintain silence.  He sat there in this uncomfortable stillness some

time, then got up and went out.



The moment he had disappeared he heard a prodigious shout of laughter

break forth.  He saw that their plain purpose had been to insult him.

He ascended to the flat roof, hoping to be able to cool down his spirit

there and get back his tranquility.  He found the young tinner up there,

alone and brooding, and entered into conversation with him.  They were

pretty fairly matched, now, in unpopularity and general ill-luck and

misery, and they had no trouble in meeting upon this common ground with

advantage and something of comfort to both.  But Tracy's movements had

been watched, and in a few minutes the tormentors came straggling one

after another to the roof, where they began to stroll up and down in an

apparently purposeless way.  But presently they fell to dropping remarks

that were evidently aimed at Tracy, and some of them at the tinner.

The ringleader of this little mob was a short-haired bully and amateur

prize-fighter named Allen, who was accustomed to lording it over the

upper floor, and had more than once shown a disposition to make trouble

with Tracy.  Now there was an occasional cat-call, and hootings, and

whistlings, and finally the diversion of an exchange of connected remarks

was introduced:



"How many does it take to make a pair?"



"Well, two generally makes a pair, but sometimes there ain't stuff enough

in them to make a whole pair."  General laugh.



"What were you saying about the English a while ago?"



"Oh, nothing, the English are all right, only--I--"



"What was it you said about them?"



"Oh, I only said they swallow well."



"Swallow better than other people?"



"Oh, yes, the English swallow a good deal better than other people."



"What is it they swallow best?"



"Oh, insults."  Another general laugh.



"Pretty hard to make 'em fight, ain't it?"



"No, taint hard to make 'em fight."



"Ain't it, really?"



"No, taint hard.  It's impossible."  Another laugh.



"This one's kind of spiritless, that's certain."



"Couldn't be the other way--in his case."



"Why?"



"Don't you know the secret of his birth?"



"No! has he got a secret of his birth?"



"You bet he has."



"What is it?"



"His father was a wax-figger."



Allen came strolling by where the pair were sitting; stopped, and said to

the tinner;



"How are you off for friends, these days?"



"Well enough off."



"Got a good many?"



"Well, as many as I need."



"A friend is valuable, sometimes--as a protector, you know.  What do you

reckon would happen if I was to snatch your cap off and slap you in the

face with it?"



"Please don't trouble me, Mr.  Allen, I ain't doing anything to you."



You answer me!  What do you reckon would happen?"



"Well, I don't know."



Tracy spoke up with a good deal of deliberation and said:



"Don't trouble the young fellow, I can tell you what would happen."



"Oh, you can, can you?  Boys, Johnny Bull can tell us what would happen

if I was to snatch this chump's cap off and slap him in the face with it.

Now you'll see."



He snatched the cap and struck the youth in the face, and before he could

inquire what was going to happen, it had already happened, and he was

warming the tin with the broad of his back.  Instantly there was a rush,

and shouts of:



"A ring, a ring, make a ring!  Fair play all round!  Johnny's grit; give

him a chance."



The ring was quickly chalked on the tin, and Tracy found himself as eager

to begin as he could have been if his antagonist had been a prince

instead of a mechanic.  At bottom he was a little surprised at this,

because although his theories had been all in that direction for some

time, he was not prepared to find himself actually eager to measure

strength with quite so common a man as this ruffian.  In a moment all the

windows in the neighborhood were filled with people, and the roofs also.

The men squared off, and the fight began.  But Allen stood no chance

whatever, against the young Englishman.  Neither in muscle nor in science

was he his equal.  He measured his length on the tin time and again;

in fact, as fast as he could get up he went down again, and the applause

was kept up in liberal fashion from all the neighborhood around.

Finally, Allen had to be helped up.  Then Tracy declined to punish him

further and the fight was at an end.  Allen was carried off by some of

his friends in a very much humbled condition, his face black and blue and

bleeding, and Tracy was at once surrounded by the young fellows, who

congratulated him, and told him that he had done the whole house a

service, and that from this out Mr. Allen would be a little more

particular about how he handled slights and insults and maltreatment

around amongst the boarders.



Tracy was a hero now, and exceedingly popular.  Perhaps nobody had ever

been quite so popular on that upper floor before.  But if being

discountenanced by these young fellows had been hard to bear, their

lavish commendations and approval and hero-worship was harder still to

endure.  He felt degraded, but he did not allow himself to analyze the

reasons why, too closely.  He was content to satisfy himself with the

suggestion that he looked upon himself as degraded by the public

spectacle which he had made of himself, fighting on a tin roof, for the

delectation of everybody a block or two around.  But he wasn't entirely

satisfied with that explanation of it.  Once he went a little too far and

wrote in his diary that his case was worse than that of the prodigal son.

He said the prodigal son merely fed swine, he didn't have to chum with

them.  But he struck that out, and said "All men are equal.  I will not

disown my principles.  These men are as good as I am."



Tracy was become popular on the lower floors also.  Everybody was

grateful for Allen's reduction to the ranks, and for his transformation

from a doer of outrages to a mere threatener of them.  The young girls,

of whom there were half a dozen, showed many attentions to Tracy,

particularly that boarding house pet Hattie, the landlady's daughter.

She said to him, very sweetly,



"I think you're ever so nice."



And when he said, "I'm glad you think so, Miss Hattie," she said, still

more sweetly,



"Don't call me Miss Hattie--call me Puss."



Ah, here was promotion!  He had struck the summit.  There were no higher

heights to climb in that boarding house.  His popularity was complete.



In the presence of people, Tracy showed a tranquil outside, but his heart

was being eaten out of him by distress and despair.



In a little while he should be out of money, and then what should he do?

He wished, now, that he had borrowed a little more liberally from that

stranger's store.  He found it impossible to sleep.  A single torturing,

terrifying thought went racking round and round in his head, wearing a

groove in his brain: What should he do--What was to become of him?  And

along with it began to intrude a something presently which was very like

a wish that he had not joined the great and noble ranks of martyrdom, but

had stayed at home and been content to be merely an earl and nothing

better, with nothing more to do in this world of a useful sort than an

earl finds to do.  But he smothered that part of his thought as well as

he could; he made every effort to drive it away, and with fair keep it

from intruding a little  success, but he couldn't now and then, and when

it intruded it came suddenly and nipped him like a bite, a sting, a burn.

He recognized that thought by the peculiar sharpness of its pang.  The

others were painful enough, but that one cut to the quick when it calm.

Night after night he lay tossing to the music of the hideous snoring of

the honest bread-winners until two and three o'clock in the morning,

then got up and took refuge on the roof, where he sometimes got a nap and

sometimes failed entirely.  His appetite was leaving him and the zest of

life was going along with it.  Finally, owe day, being near the imminent

verge of total discouragement, he said to himself--and took occasion to

blush privately when he said it, "If my father knew what my American name

is,--he--well, my duty to my father rather requires that I furnish him my

name.  I have no right to make his days and nights unhappy, I can do

enough unhappiness for the family all by myself.  Really he ought to know

what my American name is."  He thought over it a while and framed a

cablegram in his mind to this effect:



"My American name is Howard Tracy."



That wouldn't be suggesting anything.  His father could understand that

as he chose, and doubtless he would understand it as it was meant, as a

dutiful and affectionate desire on the part of a son to make his old

father happy for a moment.  Continuing his train of thought, Tracy said

to himself, "Ah, but if he should cable me to come home!  I--I--couldn't

do that--I mustn't do that.  I've started out on a mission, and I mustn't

turn my back on it in cowardice.  No, no, I couldn't go home, at--at--

least I shouldn't want to go home."  After a reflective pause: "Well,

maybe--perhaps--it would be my duty to go in the circumstances; he's very

old and he does need me by him to stay his footsteps down the long hill

that inclines westward toward the sunset of his life.  Well, I'll think

about that.  Yes, of course it wouldn't be right to stay here.  If I--

well, perhaps I could just drop him a line and put it off a little while

and satisfy him in that way.  It would be--well, it would mar everything

to have him require me to come instantly."  Another reflective pause--

then: "And yet if he should do that I don't know but--oh, dear me--home!

how good it sounds! and a body is excusable for wanting to see his home

again, now and then, anyway."



He went to one of the telegraph offices in the avenue and got the first

end of what Barrow called the "usual Washington courtesy," where "they

treat you as a tramp until they find out you're a congressman, and then

they slobber all over you."  There was a boy of seventeen on duty there,

tying his shoe.  He had his foot on a chair and his back turned towards

the wicket.  He glanced over his shoulder, took Tracy's measure, turned

back, and went on tying his shoe.  Tracy finished writing his telegram

and waited, still waited, and still waited, for that performance to

finish, but there didn't seem to be any finish to it; so finally Tracy

said:



"Can't you take my telegram?"



The youth looked over his shoulder and said, by his manner, not his

words:



"Don't you think you could wait a minute, if you tried?"



However, he got the shoe tied at last, and came and took the telegram,

glanced over it, then looked up surprised, at Tracy.  There was something

in his look that bordered upon respect, almost reverence, it seemed to

Tracy, although he had been so long without anything of this kind he was

not sure that he knew the signs of it.



The boy read the address aloud, with pleased expression in face and

voice.



"The Earl of Rossmore!  Cracky!  Do you know him?"



"Yes."



"Is that so!  Does he know you?"



"Well--yes."



"Well, I swear!  Will he answer you?"



"I think he will."



"Will he though?  Where'll you have it sent?"



"Oh, nowhere.  I'll call here and get it.  When shall I call?"



"Oh, I don't know--I'll send it to you.  Where shall I send it?  Give me

your address; I'll send it to you soon's it comes."



But Tracy didn't propose to do this.  He had acquired the boy's

admiration and deferential respect, and he wasn't willing to throw these

precious things away, a result sure to follow if he should give the

address of that boarding house.  So he said again that he would call and

get the telegram, and went his way.



He idled along, reflecting.  He said to himself, "There is something

pleasant about being respected.  I have acquired the respect of Mr.

Allen and some of those others, and almost the deference of some of them

on pure merit, for having thrashed Allen.  While their respect and their

deference--if it is deference--is pleasant, a deference based upon a

sham, a shadow, does really seem pleasanter still.  It's no real merit to

be in correspondence with an earl, and yet after all, that boy makes me

feel as if there was."



The cablegram was actually gone home! the thought of it gave him an

immense uplift.  He walked with a lighter tread.  His heart was full of

happiness.  He threw aside all hesitances and confessed to himself that

he was glad through and through that he was going to give up this

experiment and go back to his home again.  His eagerness to get his

father's answer began to grow, now, and it grew with marvelous celerity,

after it began.  He waited an hour, walking about, putting in his time as

well as he could, but interested in nothing that came under his eye, and

at last he presented himself at the office again and asked if any answer

had come yet.  The boy said,



"No, no answer yet," then glanced at the clock and added, "I don't think

it's likely you'll get one to-day."



"Why not?"



"Well, you see it's getting pretty late.  You can't always tell where

'bouts a man is when he's on the other side, and you can't always find

him just the minute you want him, and you see it's getting about six

o'clock now, and over there it's pretty late at night."



"Why yes," said Tracy, "I hadn't thought of that."



"Yes, pretty late, now, half past ten or eleven.  Oh yes, you probably

won't get any answer to-night."









CHAPTER XIV.



So Tracy went home to supper.  The odors in that supper room seemed more

strenuous and more horrible than ever before, and he was happy in the

thought that he was so soon to be free from them again.  When the supper

was over he hardly knew whether he had eaten any of it or not, and he

certainly hadn't heard any of the conversation.  His heart had been

dancing all the time, his thoughts had been faraway from these things,

and in the visions of his mind the sumptuous appointments of his father's

castle had risen before him without rebuke.  Even the plushed flunkey,

that walking symbol of a sham inequality, had not been unpleasant to his

dreaming view.  After the meal Barrow said,



"Come with me.  I'll give you a jolly evening."



"Very good.  Where are you going?"



"To my club."



"What club is that?"



"Mechanics' Debating Club."



Tracy shuddered, slightly.  He didn't say anything about having visited

that place himself.  Somehow he didn't quite relish the memory of that

time.  The sentiments which had made his former visit there so enjoyable,

and filled him with such enthusiasm, had undergone a gradual change, and

they had rotted away to such a degree that he couldn't contemplate

another visit there with anything strongly resembling delight.  In fact

he was a little ashamed to go; he didn't want to go there and find out by

the rude impact of the thought of those people upon his reorganized

condition of mind, how sharp the change had been.  He would have

preferred to stay away.  He expected that now he should hear nothing

except sentiments which would be a reproach to him in his changed mental

attitude, and he rather wished he might be excused.  And yet he didn't

quite want to say that, he didn't want to show how he did feel, or show

any disinclination to go, and so he forced himself to go along with

Barrow, privately purposing to take an early opportunity to get away.



After the essayist of the evening had read his paper, the chairman

announced that the debate would now be upon the subject of the previous

meeting, "The American Press."  It saddened the backsliding disciple to

hear this announcement.  It brought up too many reminiscences.  He wished

he had happened upon some other subject.  But the debate began, and he

sat still and listened.



In the course of the discussion one of the speakers--a blacksmith named

Tompkins--arraigned all monarchs and all lords in the earth for their

cold selfishness in retaining their unearned dignities.  He said that no

monarch and no son of a monarch, no lord and no son of a lord ought to be

able to look his fellow man in the face without shame.  Shame for

consenting to keep his unearned titles, property, and privileges--at the

expense of other people; shame for consenting to remain, on any terms, in

dishonourable possession of these things, which represented bygone

robberies and wrongs inflicted upon the general people of the nation.

He said, "if there were a laid or the son of a lord here, I would like to

reason with him, and try to show him how unfair and how selfish his

position is.  I would try to persuade him to relinquish it, take his

place among men on equal terms, earn the bread he eats, and hold of

slight value all deference paid him because of artificial position, all

reverence not the just due of his own personal merits."



Tracy seemed to be listening to utterances of his own made in talks with

his radical friends in England.  It was as if some eavesdropping

phonograph had treasured up his words and brought them across the

Atlantic to accuse him with them in the hour of his defection and

retreat.  Every word spoken by this stranger seemed to leave a blister on

Tracy's conscience, and by the time the speech was finished he felt that

he was all conscience and one blister.  This man's deep compassion for

the enslaved and oppressed millions in Europe who had to bear with the

contempt of that small class above them, throned upon shining heights

whose paths were shut against them, was the very thing he had often

uttered himself.  The pity in this man's voice and words was the very

twin of the pity that used to reside in his own heart and come from his

own lips when he thought of these oppressed peoples.



The homeward tramp was accomplished in brooding silence.  It was a

silence most grateful to Tracy's feelings.  He wouldn't have broken it

for anything; for he was ashamed of himself all the way through to his

spine.  He kept saying to himself:



"How unanswerable it all is--how absolutely unanswerable!  It is basely,

degradingly selfish to keep those unearned honors, and--and--oh, hang

it, nobody but a cur--"



"What an idiotic damned speech that Tompkins made!"



This outburst was from Barrow.  It flooded Tracy's demoralized soul with

waters of refreshment.  These were the darlingest words the poor

vacillating young apostate had ever heard--for they whitewashed his shame

for him, and that is a good service to have when you can't get the best

of all verdicts, self-acquittal.



"Come up to my room and smoke a pipe, Tracy."



Tracy had been expecting this invitation, and had had his declination all

ready: but he was glad enough to accept, now.  Was it possible that a

reasonable argument could be made against that man's desolating speech?

He was burning to hear Barrow try it.  He knew how to start him, and keep

him going: it was to seem to combat his positions--a process effective

with most people.



"What is it you object to in Tompkins's speech, Barrow?"



"Oh, the leaving out of the factor of human nature; requiring another man

to do what you wouldn't do yourself."



"Do you mean--"



"Why here's what I mean; it's very simple.  Tompkins is a blacksmith; has

a family; works for wages; and hard, too--fooling around won't furnish

the bread.  Suppose it should turn out that by the death of somebody in

England he is suddenly an earl--income, half a million dollars a year.

What would he do?"



"Well, I--I suppose he would have to decline to--"



"Man, he would grab it in a second!"



"Do you really think he would?"



"Think?--I don't think anything about it, I know it."



"Why?"



"Because he's not a fool."



"So you think that if he were a fool, he--"



"No, I don't.  Fool or no fool, he would grab it.  Anybody would.

Anybody that's alive.  And I've seen dead people that would get up and go

for it.  I would myself."



"This was balm, this was healing, this was rest and peace and comfort."



"But I thought you were opposed to nobilities."



"Transmissible ones, yes.  But that's nothing.  I'm opposed to

millionaires, but it would be dangerous to offer me the position."



"You'd take it?"



"I would leave the funeral of my dearest enemy to go and assume its

burdens and responsibilities."



Tracy thought a while, then said:



"I don't know that I quite get the bearings of your position.  You say

you are opposed to hereditary nobilities, and yet if you had the chance

you would--"



"Take one?  In a minute I would.  And there isn't a mechanic in that

entire club that wouldn't.  There isn't a lawyer, doctor, editor, author,

tinker, loafer, railroad president, saint-land, there isn't a human being

in the United States that wouldn't jump at the chance!"



"Except me," said Tracy softly.



"Except you!"   Barrow could hardly get the words out, his scorn so

choked him.  And he couldn't get any further than that form of words;

it seemed to dam his flow, utterly.  He got up and came and glared upon

Tracy in a kind of outraged and unappeasable way, and said again, "Except

you!"  He walked around him--inspecting him from one point of view and

then another, and relieving his soul now and then by exploding that

formula at him; "Except you!"  Finally he slumped down into his chair

with the air of one who gives it up, and said:



"He's straining his viscera and he's breaking his heart trying to get

some low-down job that a good dog wouldn't have, and yet wants to let on

that if he had a chance to scoop an earldom he wouldn't do it.  Tracy,

don't put this kind of a strain on me.  Lately I'm not as strong as I

was."



"Well, I wasn't meaning to put--a strain on you, Barrow, I was only

meaning to intimate that if an earldom ever does fall in my way--"



"There--I wouldn't give myself any worry about that, if I was you.  And

besides, I can settle what you would do.  Are you any different from me?"



"Well--no."



"Are you any better than me?"



"O,--er--why, certainly not."



"Are you as good?  Come!"



"Indeed, I--the fact is you take me so suddenly--"



"Suddenly?  What is there sudden about it?  It isn't a difficult question

is it?  Or doubtful?  Just measure us on the only fair lines--the lines

of merit--and of course you'll admit that a journeyman chairmaker that

earns his twenty dollars a week, and has had the good and genuine culture

of contact with men, and care, and hardship, and failure, and success,

and downs and ups and ups and downs, is just a trifle the superior of a

young fellow like you, who doesn't know how to do anything that's

valuable, can't earn his living in any secure and steady way, hasn't had

any experience of life and its seriousness, hasn't any culture but the

artificial culture of books, which adorns but doesn't really educate

--come! if I wouldn't scorn an earldom, what the devil right have you

to do it!"



Tracy dissembled his joy, though he wanted to thank the chair-maker for

that last remark.  Presently a thought struck him, and he spoke up

briskly and said:



"But look here, I really can't quite get the hang of your notions--your,

principles, if they are principles.  You are inconsistent.  You are

opposed to aristocracies, yet you'd take an earldom if you could.  Am I

to understand that you don't blame an earl for being and remaining an

earl?"



"I certainly don't."



"And you wouldn't blame Tompkins, or yourself, or me, or anybody, for

accepting an earldom if it was offered?"



"Indeed I wouldn't."



"Well, then, who would you blame?"



"The whole nation--any bulk and mass of population anywhere, in any

country, that will put up with the infamy, the outrage, the insult of a

hereditary aristocracy which they can't enter--and on absolutely free and

equal terms."



"Come, aren't you beclouding yourself with distinctions that are not

differences?"



"Indeed I am not.  I am entirely clear-headed about this thing.  If I

could extirpate an aristocratic system by declining its honors, then I

should be a rascal to accept them.  And if enough of the mass would join

me to make the extirpation possible, then I should be a rascal to do

otherwise than help in the attempt."



"I believe I understand--yes, I think I get the idea.  You have no blame

for the lucky few who naturally decline to vacate the pleasant nest they

were born into, you only despise the all-powerful and stupid mass of the

nation for allowing the nest to exist."



"That's it, that's it!  You can get a simple thing through your head if

you work at it long enough."



"Thanks."



"Don't mention it.  And I'll give you some sound advice: when you go

back; if you find your nation up and ready to abolish that hoary affront,

lend a hand; but if that isn't the state of things and you get a chance

at an earldom, don't you be a fool--you take it."



Tracy responded with earnestness and enthusiasm:



"As I live, I'll do it!"



Barrow laughed.



"I never saw such a fellow.  I begin to think you've got a good deal of

imagination.  With you, the idlest-fancy freezes into a reality at a

breath.  Why, you looked, then, as if it wouldn't astonish you if you did

tumble into an earldom."



Tracy blushed.  Barrow added: "Earldom!  Oh, yes, take it, if it offers;

but meantime we'll go on looking around, in a modest way, and if you get

a chance to superintend a sausage-stuffer at six or eight dollars a week,

you just trade off the earldom for a last year's almanac and stick to the

sausage-stuffing,"









CHAPTER XV.



Tracy went to bed happy once more, at rest in his mind once more.  He had

started out on a high emprise--that was to his credit, he argued; he had

fought the best fight he could, considering the odds against him--that

was to his credit; he had been defeated--certainly there was nothing

discreditable in that.  Being defeated, he had a right to retire with the

honors of war and go back without prejudice to the position in the

world's society to which he had been born.  Why not? even the rabid

republican chair-maker would do that.  Yes, his conscience was

comfortable once more.



He woke refreshed, happy, and eager for his cablegram.  He had been born

an aristocrat, he had been a democrat for a time, he was now an

aristocrat again.  He marveled to find that this final change was not

merely intellectual, it had invaded his feeling; and he also marveled to

note that this feeling seemed a good deal less artificial than any he had

entertained in his system for a long time.  He could also have noted,

if he had thought of it, that his bearing had stiffened, over night,

and that his chin had lifted itself a shade.  Arrived in the basement,

he was about to enter the breakfast room when he saw old Marsh in the dim

light of a corner of the hall, beckoning him with his finger to approach.

The blood welled slowly up in Tracy's cheek, and he said with a grade of

injured dignity almost ducal:



"Is that for me?"



"Yes."



"What is the purpose of it?"



"I want to speak to you--in private."



"This spot is private enough for me."



Marsh was surprised; and not particularly pleased.  He approached and

said:



"Oh, in public, then, if you prefer.  Though it hasn't been my way."



The boarders gathered to the spot, interested.



"Speak out," said Tracy.  "What is it you want?"



"Well, haven't you--er--forgot something?"



"I?  I'm not aware of it."



"Oh, you're not?  Now you stop and think, a minute."



"I refuse to stop and think.  It doesn't interest me.  If it interests

you, speak out."



"Well, then," said Marsh, raising his voice to a slightly angry pitch,

"You forgot to pay your board yesterday--if you're bound to have it

public."



Oh, yes, this heir to an annual million or so had been dreaming and

soaring, and had forgotten that pitiful three or four dollars.  For

penalty he must have it coarsely flung in his face in the presence of

these people--people in whose countenances was already beginning to dawn

an uncharitable enjoyment of the situation.



"Is that all!  Take your money and give your terrors a rest."



Tracy's hand went down into his pocket with angry decision.  But--it

didn't come out.  The color began to ebb out of his face.  The

countenances about him showed a growing interest; and some of them a

heightened satisfaction.  There was an uncomfortable pause--then he

forced out, with difficulty, the words:



"I've--been robbed!"



Old Marsh's eyes flamed up with Spanish fire, and he exclaimed:



"Robbed, is it?  That's your tune?  It's too old--been played in this

house too often; everybody plays it that can't get work when he wants it,

and won't work when he can get it.  Trot out Mr. Allen, somebody, and let

him take a toot at it.  It's his turn next, he forgot, too, last night.

I'm laying for him."



One of the negro women came scrambling down stairs as pale as a sorrel

horse with consternation and excitement:



"Misto Marsh, Misto Allen's skipped out!"



"What!"



"Yes-sah, and cleaned out his room clean; tuck bofe towels en de soap!"



"You lie, you hussy!"



"It's jes' so, jes' as I tells you--en Misto Summer's socks is gone, en

Misto Naylor's yuther shirt."



Mr. Marsh was at boiling point by this time.  He turned upon Tracy:



"Answer up now--when are you going to settle?"



"To-day--since you seem to be in a hurry."



"To-day is it?  Sunday--and you out of work?  I like that.  Come--where

are you going to get the money?"



Tracy's spirit was rising again.  He proposed to impress these people:



"I am expecting a cablegram from home."



Old Marsh was caught out, with the surprise of it.  The idea was so

immense, so extravagant, that he couldn't get his breath at first.  When

he did get it, it came rancid with sarcasm.



"A cablegram--think of it, ladies and gents, he's expecting a cablegram!

He's expecting a cablegram--this duffer, this scrub, this bilk!  From his

father--eh?  Yes--without a doubt.  A dollar or two a word--oh, that's

nothing--they don't mind a little thing like that--this kind's fathers

don't.  Now his father is--er--well, I reckon his father--"



"My father is an English earl!"



The crowd fell back aghast-aghast at the sublimity of the young loafer's

"cheek."  Then they burst into a laugh that made the windows rattle.

Tracy was too angry to realize that he had done a foolish thing.  He

said:



"Stand aside, please.  I--"



"Wait a minute, your lordship," said Marsh, bowing low, "where is your

lordship going?"



"For the cablegram.  Let me pass."



"Excuse me, your lordship, you'll stay right where you are."



"What do you mean by that?"



"I mean that I didn't begin to keep boarding-house yesterday.  It means

that I am not the kind that can be taken in by every hack-driver's son

that comes loafing over here because he can't bum a living at home.  It

means that you can't skip out on any such--"



Tracy made a step toward the old man, but Mrs.  Marsh sprang between, and

said:



"Don't, Mr. Tracy, please."  She turned to her husband and said, "Do

bridle your tongue.  What has he done to be treated so?  Can't you see he

has lost his mind, with trouble and distress?  He's not responsible."



"Thank your kind heart, madam, but I've not lost my mind; and if I can

have the mere privilege of stepping to the telegraph office--"



"Well, you can't," cried Marsh.



"--or sending--"



"Sending!  That beats everything.  If there's anybody that's fool enough

to go on such a chuckle-headed errand--"



"Here comes Mr. Barrow--he will go for me.  Barrow--"



A brisk fire of exclamations broke out--



"Say, Barrow, he's expecting a cablegram!"



"Cablegram from his father, you know!"



"Yes--cablegram from the wax-figger!"



"And say, Barrow, this fellow's an earl--take off your hat, pull down

your vest!"



"Yes, he's come off and forgot his crown, that he wears Sundays.  He's

cabled over to his pappy to send it."



"You step out and get that cablegram, Barrow; his majesty's a little lame

to-day."



"Oh stop," cried Barrow; "give the man a chance."  He turned, and said

with some severity, "Tracy, what's the matter with you?  What kind of

foolishness is this you've been talking.  You ought to have more sense."



"I've not been talking foolishness; and if you'll go to the telegraph

office--"



"Oh; don't talk so.  I'm your friend in trouble and out of it, before

your face and behind your back, for anything in reason; but you've lost

your head, you see, and this moonshine about a cablegram--"



"I'll go there and ask for it!"



"Thank you from the bottom of my heart, Brady.  Here, I'll give you a

Written order for it.  Fly, now, and fetch it.  We'll soon see!"



Brady flew.  Immediately the sort of quiet began to steal over the crowd

which means dawning doubt, misgiving; and might be translated into the

words, "Maybe he is expecting a cablegram--maybe he has got a father

somewhere--maybe we've been just a little too fresh, just a shade too

'previous'!"



Loud talk ceased; then the mutterings and low murmurings and whisperings

died out.  The crowd began to crumble apart.  By ones and twos the

fragments drifted to the breakfast table.  Barrow tried to bring Tracy

in; but he said:



"Not yet, Barrow--presently."



Mrs. Marsh and Hattie tried, offering gentle and kindly persuasions; but

he said;



"I would rather wait--till he comes."



Even old Marsh began to have suspicions that maybe he had been a trifle

too "brash," as he called it in the privacy of his soul, and he pulled

himself together and started toward Tracy with invitation in his eyes;

but Tracy warned him off with a gesture which was quite positive and

eloquent.  Then followed the stillest quarter of an hour which had ever

been known in that house at that time of day.  It was so still, and so

solemn withal, that when somebody's cup slipped from his fingers and

landed in his plate the shock made people start, and the sharp sound

seemed as indecorous there and as out of place as if a coffin and

mourners were imminent and being waited for.  And at last when Brady's

feet came clattering down the stairs the sacrilege seemed unbearable.

Everybody rose softly and turned toward the door, where stood Tracy;

then with a common impulse, moved a step or two in that direction, and

stopped.  While they gazed, young Brady arrived, panting, and put into

Tracy's hand,--sure enough--an envelope.  Tracy fastened a bland

victorious eye upon the gazers, and kept it there till one by one they

dropped their eyes, vanquished and embarrassed.  Then he tore open the

telegram and glanced at its message.  The yellow paper fell from his

fingers and fluttered to the floor, and his face turned white.  There was

nothing there but one word--



"Thanks."



The humorist of the house, the tall, raw-boned Billy Nash, caulker from

the navy yard, was standing in the rear of the crowd.  In the midst of

the pathetic silence that was now brooding over the place and moving some

few hearts there toward compassion, he began to whimper, then he put his

handkerchief to his eyes and buried his face in the neck of the

bashfulest young fellow in the company, a navy-yard blacksmith, shrieked

"Oh, pappy, how could you!" and began to bawl like a teething baby, if

one may imagine a baby with the energy and the devastating voice of a

jackass.



So perfect was that imitation of a child's cry, and so vast the scale of

it and so ridiculous the aspect of the performer, that all gravity was

swept from the place as if by a hurricane, and almost everybody there

joined in the crash of laughter provoked by the exhibition.  Then the

small mob began to take its revenge--revenge for the discomfort and

apprehension it had brought upon itself by its own too rash freshness of

a little while before.  It guyed its poor victim, baited him, worried

him, as dogs do with a cornered cat.  The victim answered back with

defiances and challenges which included everybody, and which only gave

the sport new spirit and variety; but when he changed his tactics and

began to single out individuals and invite them by name, the fun lost its

funniness and the interest of the show died out, along with the noise.



Finally Marsh was about to take an innings, but Barrow said:



"Never mind, now--leave him alone.  You've no account with him but a

money account.  I'll take care of that myself."



The distressed and worried landlady gave Barrow a fervently grateful look

for his championship of the abused stranger; and the pet of the house, a

very prism in her cheap but ravishing Sunday rig, blew him a kiss from

the tips of her fingers and said, with the darlingest smile and a sweet

little toss of her head:



"You're the only man here, and I'm going to set my cap for you, you dear

old thing!"



"For shame, Puss!  How you talk!  I never saw such a child!"



It took a good deal of argument and persuasion--that is to say, petting,

under these disguises--to get Tracy to entertain the idea of breakfast.

He at first said he would never eat again in that house; and added that

he had enough firmness of character, he trusted, to enable him to starve

like a man when the alternative was to eat insult with his bread.



When he had finished his breakfast, Barrow took him to his room,

furnished him a pipe, and said cheerily:



"Now, old fellow, take in your battle-flag out of the wet, you're not in

the hostile camp any more.  You're a little upset by your troubles,

and that's natural enough, but don't let your mind run on them anymore

than you can help; drag your thoughts away from your troubles by the

ears, by the heels, or any other way, so you manage it; it's the

healthiest thing a body can do; dwelling on troubles is deadly, just

deadly--and that's the softest name there is for it.  You must keep your

mind amused--you must, indeed."



"Oh, miserable me!"



"Don't!  There's just pure heart-break in that tone.  It's just as I say;

you've got to get right down to it and amuse your mind, as if it was

salvation."



"They're easy words to say, Barrow, but how am I going to amuse,

entertain, divert a mind that finds itself suddenly assaulted and

overwhelmed by disasters of a sort not dreamed of and not provided for?

No--no, the bare idea of amusement is repulsive to my feelings: Let us

talk of death and funerals."



"No--not yet.  That would be giving up the ship.  We'll not give up the

ship yet.  I'm going to amuse you; I sent Brady out for the wherewithal

before you finished breakfast."



"You did?  What is it?"



"Come, this is a good sign--curiosity.  Oh, there's hope for you yet."









CHAPTER XVI.



Brady arrived with a box, and departed, after saying,  "They're finishing

one up, but they'll be along as soon as it's done."



Barrow took a frameless oil portrait a foot square from the box, set it

up in a good light, without comment, and reached for another, taking a

furtive glance at Tracy, meantime. The stony solemnity in Tracy's face

remained as it was, and gave out no sign of interest.  Barrow placed the

second portrait beside the first, and stole another glance while reaching

for a third.  The stone image softened, a shade.  No. 3 forced the ghost

of a smile, No. 4 swept indifference wholly away, and No. 5 started a

laugh which was still in good and hearty condition when No. 14 took its

place in the row.



"Oh, you're all right, yet," said Barrow.  "You see you're not past

amusement."



The pictures were fearful, as to color, and atrocious as to drawing and

expression; but the feature which squelched animosity and made them funny

was a feature which could not achieve its full force in a single picture,

but required the wonder-working assistance of repetition.  One loudly

dressed mechanic in stately attitude, with his hand on a cannon, ashore,

and a ship riding at anchor in the offing,--this is merely odd; but when

one sees the same cannon and the same ship in fourteen pictures in a row,

and a different mechanic standing watch in each, the thing gets to be

funny.



"Explain--explain these aberrations," said Tracy.



"Well, they are not the achievement of a single intellect, a single

talent--it takes two to do these miracles.  They are collaborations;

the one artist does the figure, the other the accessories.  The

figure-artist is a German shoemaker with an untaught passion for art,

the other is a simple hearted old Yankee sailor-man whose possibilities

are strictly limited to his ship, his cannon and his patch of petrified

sea. They work these things up from twenty-five-cent tintypes; they get

six dollars apiece for them, and they can grind out a couple a day when

they strike what they call a boost--that is, an inspiration."



"People actually pay money for these calumnies?"



"They actually do--and quite willingly, too.  And these abortionists

could double their trade and work the women in, if Capt. Saltmarsh could

whirl a horse in, or a piano, or a guitar, in place of his cannon.  The

fact is, he fatigues the market with that cannon.  Even the male market,

I mean.  These fourteen in the procession are not all satisfied.  One is

an old "independent" fireman, and he wants an engine in place of the

cannon; another is a mate of a tug, and wants a tug in place of the ship

--and so on, and so on.  But the captain can't make a tug that is

deceptive, and a fire engine is many flights beyond his power."



"This is a most extraordinary form of robbery, I never have heard of

anything like it.  It's interesting."



"Yes, and so are the artists.  They are perfectly honest men, and

sincere.  And the old sailor-man is full of sound religion, and is as

devoted a student of the Bible and misquoter of it as you can find

anywhere.  I don't know a better man or kinder hearted old soul than

Saltmarsh, although he does swear a little, sometimes."



"He seems to be perfect.  I want to know him, Barrow."



"You'll have the chance.  I guess I hear them coming, now.  We'll draw

them out on their art, if you like."



The artists arrived and shook hands with great heartiness.  The German

was forty and a little fleshy, with a shiny bald head and a kindly face

and deferential manner.  Capt.  Saltmarsh was sixty, tall, erect,

powerfully built, with coal-black hair and whiskers, and he had a well

tanned complexion, and a gait and countenance that were full of command,

confidence and decision.  His horny hands and wrists were covered with

tattoo-marks, and when his lips parted, his teeth showed up white and

blemishless.  His voice was the effortless deep bass of a church organ,

and would disturb the tranquility of a gas flame fifty yards away.



"They're wonderful pictures," said Barrow.  "We've been examining them."



"It is very bleasant dot you like dem," said Handel, the German, greatly

pleased.  "Und you, Herr Tracy, you haf peen bleased mit dem too,

alretty?"



"I can honestly say I have never seen anything just like them before."



"Schon!" cried the German, delighted.  "You hear, Gaptain?  Here is a

chentleman, yes, vot abbreviate unser aart."



The captain was charmed, and said:



"Well, sir, we're thankful for a compliment yet, though they're not as

scarce now as they used to be before we made a reputation."



"Getting the reputation is the up-hill time in most things, captain."



"It's so.  It ain't enough to know how to reef a gasket, you got to make

the mate know you know it.  That's reputation.  The good word, said at

the right time, that's the word that makes us; and evil be to him that

evil thinks, as Isaiah says."



"It's very relevant, and hits the point exactly," said Tracy.



"Where did you study art, Captain?"



"I haven't studied; it's a natural gift."



"He is born mit dose cannon in him.  He tondt haf to do noding, his

chenius do all de vork.  Of he is asleep, and take a pencil in his hand,

out come a cannon.  Py crashus, of he could do a clavier, of he could do

a guitar, of he could do a vashtub, it is a fortune, heiliger Yohanniss

it is yoost a fortune!"



"Well, it is an immense pity that the business is hindered and limited in

this unfortunate way."



The captain grew a trifle excited, himself, now:



"You've said it, Mr. Tracy!--Hindered?  well, I should say so.  Why, look

here.  This fellow here, No. 11, he's a hackman,--a flourishing hackman,

I may say.  He wants his hack in this picture.  Wants it where the cannon

is.  I got around that difficulty, by telling him the cannon's our

trademark, so to speak--proves that the picture's our work, and I was

afraid if we left it out people wouldn't know for certain if it was a

Saltmarsh--Handel--now you wouldn't yourself--"



"What, Captain?  You wrong yourself, indeed you do.  Anyone who has once

seen a genuine Saltmarsh-Handel is safe from imposture forever.  Strip

it, flay it, skin it out of every detail but the bare color and

expression, and that man will still recognize it--still stop to

worship--"



"Oh, how it makes me feel to hear dose oxpressions!--"



--"still say to himself again as he had, said a hundred times before, the

art of the Saltmarsh-Handel is an art apart, there is nothing in the

heavens above or in the earth beneath that resembles it,--"



"Py chiminy, nur horen Sie einmal!  In my life day haf I never heard so

brecious worts."



"So I talked him out of the hack, Mr. Tracy, and he let up on that, and

said put in a hearse, then--because he's chief mate of a hearse but don't

own it--stands a watch for wages, you know.  But I can't do a hearse any

more than I can a hack; so here we are--becalmed, you see.  And it's the

same with women and such.  They come and they want a little johnry

picture--"



"It's the accessories that make it a 'genre?'"



"Yes--cannon, or cat, or any little thing like that, that you heave into

whoop up the effect.  We could do a prodigious trade with the women if we

could foreground the things they like, but they don't give a damn for

artillery.  Mine's the lack," continued the captain with a sigh, "Andy's

end of the business is all right I tell you he's an artist from way

back!"



"Yoost hear dot old man!  He always talk 'poud me like dot," purred the

pleased German.



"Look at his work yourself!  Fourteen portraits in a row.  And no two of

them alike."



"Now that you speak of it, it is true; I hadn't noticed it before.  It is

very remarkable.  Unique, I suppose."



"I should say so.  That's the very thing about Andy--he discriminates.

Discrimination's the thief of time--forty-ninth Psalm; but that ain't any

matter, it's the honest thing, and it pays in the end."



"Yes, he certainly is great in that feature, one is obliged to admit it;

but--now mind, I'm not really criticising--don't you think he is just a

trifle overstrong in technique?"



The captain's face was knocked expressionless by this remark.  It

remained quite vacant while he muttered to himself--  "Technique--

technique--polytechnique--pyro-technique; that's it, likely--fireworks too

much color."  Then he spoke up with serenity and confidence, and said:



"Well, yes, he does pile it on pretty loud; but they all like it, you

know--fact is, it's the life of the business.  Take that No. 9, there,

Evans the butcher.  He drops into the stoodio as sober-colored as

anything you ever see: now look at him.  You can't tell him from scarlet

fever.  Well, it pleases that butcher to death.  I'm making a study of a

sausage-wreath to hang on the cannon, and I don't really reckon I can do

it right, but if I can, we can break the butcher."



"Unquestionably your confederate--I mean your--your fellow-craftsman--

is a great colorist--"



"Oh, danke schon!--"



--"in fact a quite extraordinary colorist; a colorist, I make bold to

say, without imitator here or abroad--and with a most bold and effective

touch, a touch like a battering ram; and a manner so peculiar and

romantic, and extraneous, and ad libitum, and heart-searching, that--

that--he--he is an impressionist, I presume?"



"No," said the captain simply, "he is a Presbyterian."



"It accounts for it all--all--there's something divine about his art,--

soulful, unsatisfactory, yearning, dim hearkening on the void horizon,

vague--murmuring to the spirit out of ultra-marine distances and

far-sounding cataclysms of uncreated space--oh, if he--if, he--has he

ever tried distemper?"



The captain answered up with energy:



"Not if he knows himself!  But his dog has, and--"



"Oh, no, it vas not my dog."



"Why, you said it was your dog."



"Oh, no, gaptain, I--"



"It was a white dog, wasn't it, with his tail docked, and one ear gone,

and--"



"Dot's him, dot's him!--der fery dog.  Wy, py Chorge, dot dog he would

eat baint yoost de same like--"



"Well, never mind that, now--'vast heaving--I never saw such a man.  You

start him on that dog and he'll dispute a year.  Blamed if I haven't seen

him keep it up a level two hours and a half."



"Why captain!" said Barrow.  "I guess that must be hearsay."



"No, sir, no hearsay about it--he disputed with me."



"I don't see how you stood it."



"Oh, you've got to--if you run with Andy.  But it's the only fault he's

got."



"Ain't you afraid of acquiring it?"



"Oh, no," said the captain, tranquilly, "no danger of that, I reckon."



The artists presently took their leave.  Then Barrow put his hands on

Tracy's shoulders and said:



"Look me in the eye, my boy.  Steady, steady.  There--it's just as I

thought--hoped, anyway; you're all right, thank goodness.  Nothing the

matter with your mind.  But don't do that again--even for fun.  It isn't

wise.  They wouldn't have believed you if you'd been an earl's son.

Why, they couldn't--don't you know that?  What ever possessed you to take

such a freak?  But never mind about that; let's not talk of it.  It was a

mistake; you see that yourself."



"Yes--it was a mistake."



"Well, just drop it out of your, mind; it's no harm; we all make them.

Pull your courage together, and don't brood, and don't give up.  I'm at

your back, and we'll pull through, don't you be afraid."



When he was gone, Barrow walked the floor a good while, uneasy in his

mind.  He said to himself, "I'm troubled about him.  He never would have

made a break like that if he hadn't been a little off his balance.

But I know what being out of work and no prospect ahead can do for a man.

First it knocks the pluck out of him and drags his pride in the dirt;

worry does the rest, and his mind gets shaky.  I must talk to these

people.  No--if there's any humanity in them--and there is, at bottom--

they'll be easier on him if they think his troubles have disturbed his

reason.  But I've got to find him some work; work's the only medicine for

his disease. Poor devil! away off here, and not a friend."









CHAPTER XVII



The moment Tracy was alone his spirits vanished away, and all the misery

of his situation was manifest to him.  To be moneyless and an object of

the chairmaker's charity--this was bad enough, but his folly in

proclaiming himself an earl's son to that scoffing and unbelieving crew,

and, on top of that, the humiliating result--the recollection of these

things was a sharper torture still.  He made up his mind that he would

never play earl's son again before a doubtful audience.



His father's answer was a blow he could not understand.  At times he

thought his father imagined he could get work to do in America without

any trouble, and was minded to let him try it and cure himself of his

radicalism by hard, cold, disenchanting experience.  That seemed the most

plausible theory, yet he could not content himself with it.  A theory

that pleased him better was, that this cablegram would be followed by

another, of a gentler sort, requiring him to come home.  Should he write

and strike his flag, and ask for a ticket home?  Oh, no, that he couldn't

ever do.  At least, not yet.  That cablegram would come, it certainly

would.  So he went from one telegraph office to another every day for

nearly a week, and asked if there was a cablegram for Howard Tracy.

No, there wasn't any.  So they answered him at first.  Later, they said

it before he had a chance to ask.  Later still they merely shook their

heads impatiently as soon as he came in sight.  After that he was ashamed

to go any more.



He was down in the lowest depths of despair, now; for the harder Barrow

tried to find work for him the more hopeless the possibilities seemed to

grow.  At last he said to Barrow:



"Look here.  I want to make a confession.  I have got down, now, to where

I am not only willing to acknowledge to myself that I am a shabby

creature and full of false pride, but am willing to acknowledge it to

you.  Well, I've been allowing you to wear yourself out hunting for work

for me when there's been a chance open to me all the time.  Forgive my

pride--what was left of it.  It is all gone, now, and I've come to

confess that if those ghastly artists want another confederate, I'm their

man--for at last I am dead to shame."



"No?  Really, can you paint?"



"Not as badly as they.  No, I don't claim that, for I am not a genius;

in fact, I am a very indifferent amateur, a slouchy dabster, a mere

artistic sarcasm; but drunk or asleep I can beat those buccaneers."



"Shake!  I want to shout!  Oh, I tell you, I am immensely delighted and

relieved.  Oh, just to work--that is life!  No matter what the work is--

that's of no consequence.  Just work itself is bliss when a man's been

starving for it.  I've been there!  Come right along; we'll hunt the old

boys up.  Don't you feel good?  I tell you I do."



The freebooters were not at home.  But their "works" were, displayed in

profusion all about the little ratty studio.  Cannon to the right of

them, cannon to the left of them, cannon in front--it was Balaclava come

again.



"Here's the uncontented hackman, Tracy.  Buckle to--deepen the sea-green

to turf, turn the ship into a hearse.  Let the boys have a taste of your

quality."



The artists arrived just as the last touch was put on.  They stood

transfixed with admiration.



"My souls but she's a stunner, that hearse!  The hackman will just go all

to pieces when he sees that won't he Andy?"



"Oh, it is sphlennid, sphlennid!  Herr Tracy, why haf you not said you

vas a so sublime aartist?  Lob' Gott, of you had lif'd in Paris you would

be a Pree de Rome, dot's votes de matter!"



The arrangements were soon made.  Tracy was taken into full and equal

partnership, and he went straight to work, with dash and energy, to

reconstructing gems of art whose accessories had failed to satisfy.

Under his hand, on that and succeeding days, artillery disappeared and

the emblems of peace and commerce took its place--cats, hacks, sausages,

tugs, fire engines, pianos, guitars, rocks, gardens, flower-pots,

landscapes--whatever was wanted, he flung it in; and the more out of

place and absurd the required object was, the more joy he got out of

fabricating it.  The pirates were delighted, the customers applauded, the

sex began to flock in, great was the prosperity of the firm.  Tracy was

obliged to confess to himself that there was something about work,--even

such grotesque and humble work as this--which most pleasantly satisfied a

something in his nature which had never been satisfied before, and also

gave him a strange new dignity in his own private view of himself.



                    .......................



The Unqualified Member from Cherokee Strip was in a state of deep

dejection.  For a good while, now, he had been leading a sort of life

which was calculated to kill; for it had consisted in regularly

alternating days of brilliant hope and black disappointment.  The

brilliant hopes were created by the magician Sellers, and they always

promised that now he had got the trick, sure, and would effectively

influence that materialized cowboy to call at the Towers before night.

The black disappointments consisted in the persistent and monotonous

failure of these prophecies.



At the date which this history has now reached, Sellers was appalled to

find that the usual remedy was inoperative, and that Hawkins's low

spirits refused absolutely to lift.  Something must be done, he

reflected; it was heart-breaking, this woe, this smileless misery,

this dull despair that looked out from his poor friend's face.  Yes, he

must be cheered up.  He mused a while, then he saw his way.  He said in

his most conspicuously casual vein:



"Er--uh--by the way, Hawkins, we are feeling disappointed about this

thing--the way the materializee is acting, I mean--we are disappointed;

you concede that?"



"Concede it?  Why, yes, if you like the term."



"Very well; so far, so good.  Now for the basis of the feeling.  It is

not that your heart, your affections are concerned; that is to say, it is

not that you want the materializee Itself.  You concede that?"



"Yes, I concede that, too--cordially."



"Very well, again; we are making progress.  To sum up: The feeling, it is

conceded, is not engendered by the mere conduct of the materializee; it

is conceded that it does not arise from any pang which the personality of

the materializee could assuage.  Now then," said the earl, with the light

of triumph in his eye, "the inexorable logic of the situation narrows us

down to this: our feeling has its source in the money-loss involved.

Come--isn't that so?"



"Goodness knows I concede that, with all my heart."



"Very well.  When you've found out the source of a disease, you've also

found out what remedy is required--just as in this case.  In this case

money is required.  And only money."



The old, old seduction was in that airy, confident tone and those

significant words--usually called pregnant words in books.  The old

answering signs of faith and hope showed up in Hawkins's countenance,

and he said:



"Only money?  Do you mean that you know a way to--"



"Washington, have you the impression that I have no resources but those

I allow the public and my intimate friends to know about?"



"Well, I--er--"



"Is it likely, do you think, that a man moved by nature and taught by

experience to keep his affairs to himself and a cautious and reluctant

tongue in his head, wouldn't be thoughtful enough to keep a few resources

in reserve for a rainy day, when he's got as many as I have to select

from?"



"Oh, you make me feel so much better already, Colonel!"



"Have you ever been in my laboratory?"



"Why, no."



"That's it.  You see you didn't even know that I had one.  Come along.

I've got a little trick there that I want to show you.  I've kept it

perfectly quiet, not fifty people know anything about it.  But that's my

way, always been my way.  Wait till you're ready, that's the idea; and

when you're ready, zzip!--let her go!"



"Well, Colonel, I've never seen a man that I've had such unbounded

confidence in as you.  When you say a thing right out, I always feel as

if that ends it; as if that is evidence, and proof, and everything else."



The old earl was profoundly pleased and touched.



"I'm glad you believe in me, Washington; not everybody is so just."



"I always have believed in you; and I always shall as long as I live."



"Thank you, my boy.  You shan't repent it.  And you can't."  Arrived in

the "laboratory," the earl continued, "Now, cast your eye around this

room--what do you see?  Apparently a junk-shop; apparently a hospital

connected with a patent office--in reality, the mines of Golconda in

disguise!  Look at that thing there.  Now what would you take that thing

to be?"



"I don't believe I could ever imagine."



"Of course you couldn't.  It's my grand adaptation of the phonograph to

the marine service.  You store up profanity in it for use at sea.

You know that sailors don't fly around worth a cent unless you swear

at them--so the mate that can do the best job of swearing is the most

valuable man.  In great emergencies his talent saves the ship.  But a

ship is a large thing, and he can't be everywhere at once; so there have

been times when one mate has lost a ship which could have been saved if

they had had a hundred.  Prodigious storms, you know.  Well, a ship can't

afford a hundred mates; but she can afford a hundred Cursing Phonographs,

and distribute them all over the vessel--and there, you see, she's armed

at every point.  Imagine a big storm, and a hundred of my machines all

cursing away at once--splendid spectacle, splendid!--you couldn't hear

yourself think.  Ship goes through that storm perfectly serene--she's

just as safe as she'd be on shore."



"It's a wonderful idea.  How do you prepare the thing?"



"Load it--simply load it."



"How?"



"Why you just stand over it and swear into it."



"That loads it, does it?"



"Yes--because every word it collars, it keeps--keeps it forever.  Never

wears out.  Any time you turn the crank, out it'll come.  In times of

great peril, you can reverse it, and it'll swear backwards.  That makes a

sailor hump himself!"



"O, I see.  Who loads them?--the mate?"



"Yes, if he chooses.  Or I'll furnish them already loaded.  I can hire an

expert for $75 a month who will load a hundred and fifty phonographs in

150 hours, and do it easy.  And an expert can furnish a stronger article,

of course, than the mere average uncultivated mate could.  Then you see,

all the ships of the world will buy them ready loaded--for I shall have

them loaded in any language a customer wants.  Hawkins, it will work the

grandest moral reform of the 19th century.  Five years from now, all the

swearing will be done by machinery--you won't ever hear a profane word

come from human lips on a ship.  Millions of dollars have been spent by

the churches, in the effort to abolish profanity in the commercial

marine.  Think of it--my name will live forever in the affections of good

men as the man, who, solitary and alone, accomplished this noble and

elevating reform."



"O, it is grand and beneficent and beautiful.  How did you ever come to

think of it?  You have a wonderful mind.  How did you say you loaded the

machine?"



"O, it's no trouble--perfectly simple.  If you want to load it up loud and

strong, you stand right over it and shout.  But if you leave it open and

all set, it'll eavesdrop, so to speak--that is to say, it will load

itself up with any sounds that are made within six feet of it.  Now I'll

show you how it works.  I had an expert come and load this one up

yesterday.  Hello, it's been left open--it's too bad--still I reckon it

hasn't had much chance to collect irrelevant stuff.  All you do is to

press this button in the floor--so."



The phonograph began to sing in a plaintive voice:



          There is a boarding-house, far far away,

          Where they have ham and eggs, 3 times a day.



"Hang it, that ain't it.  Somebody's been singing around here."



The plaintive song began again, mingled with a low, gradually rising wail

of cats slowly warming up toward a fight;



          O, how the boarders yell,

          When they hear that dinner bell

          They give that landlord--



(momentary outburst of terrific catfight which drowns out one word.)



          Three times a day.



(Renewal of furious catfight for a moment.  The plaintive voice on a high

fierce key, "Scat, you devils"--and a racket as of flying missiles.)



"Well, never mind--let it go.  I've got some sailor-profanity down in

there somewhere, if I could get to it.  But it isn't any matter; you see

how the machine works."



Hawkins responded with enthusiasm:



"O, it works admirably!  I know there's a hundred fortunes in it."



"And mind, the Hawkins family get their share, Washington."



"O, thanks, thanks; you are just as generous as ever.  Ah, it's the

grandest invention of the age!"



"Ah, well; we live in wonderful times.  The elements are crowded full of

beneficent forces--always have been--and ours is the first generation to

turn them to account and make them work for us.  Why Hawkins, everything

is useful--nothing ought ever to be wasted.  Now look at sewer gas, for

instance.  Sewer gas has always been wasted, heretofore; nobody tried to

save up sewer-gas--you can't name me a man.  Ain't that so? you know

perfectly well it's so."



"Yes it is so--but I never--er--I don't quite see why a body--"



"Should want to save it up?  Well, I'll tell you.  Do you see this little

invention here?--it's a decomposer--I call it a decomposer.  I give you

my word of honor that if you show me a house that produces a given

quantity of sewer-gas in a day, I'll engage to set up my decomposer there

and make that house produce a hundred times that quantity of sewer-gas in

less than half an hour."



"Dear me, but why should you want to?"



"Want to?  Listen, and you'll see.  My boy, for illuminating purposes

and economy combined, there's nothing in the world that begins with

sewer-gas.  And really, it don't cost a cent.  You put in a good inferior

article of plumbing,--such as you find everywhere--and add my decomposer,

and there you are.  Just use the ordinary gas pipes--and there your

expense ends.  Think of it.  Why, Major, in five years from now you won't

see a house lighted with anything but sewer-gas.  Every physician I talk

to, recommends it; and every plumber."



"But isn't it dangerous?"



"O, yes, more or less, but everything is--coal gas, candles, electricity

--there isn't anything that ain't."



"It lights up well, does it?"



"O, magnificently."



"Have you given it a good trial?"



"Well, no, not a first rate one.  Polly's prejudiced, and she won't let

me put it in here; but I'm playing my cards to get it adopted in the

President's house, and then it'll go--don't you doubt it.  I shall not

need this one for the present, Washington; you may take it down to some

boarding-house and give it a trial if you like."









CHAPTER XVIII.



Washington shuddered slightly at the suggestion, then his face took on a

dreamy look and he dropped into a trance of thought.  After a little,

Sellers asked him what he was grinding in his mental mill.



"Well, this.  Have you got some secret project in your head which

requires a Bank of England back of it to make it succeed?"



The Colonel showed lively astonishment, and said:



"Why, Hawkins, are you a mind-reader?"



"I?  I never thought of such a thing."



"Well, then how did you happen to drop onto that idea in this curious

fashion?  It's just mind-reading, that's what it is, though you may not

know it.  Because I have got a private project that requires a Bank of

England at its back.  How could you divine that?  What was the process?

This is interesting."



"There wasn't any process.  A thought like this happened to slip through

my head by accident: How much would make you or me comfortable?

A hundred thousand.  Yet you are expecting two or three of--these

inventions of yours to turn out some billions of money--and you are

wanting them to do that.  If you wanted ten millions, I could understand

that--it's inside the human limits.  But billions!  That's clear outside

the limits.  There must be a definite project back of that somewhere."



The earl's interest and surprise augmented with every word, and when

Hawkins finished, he said with strong admiration:



"It's wonderfully reasoned out, Washington, it certainly is.  It shows

what I think is quite extraordinary penetration.  For you've hit it;

you've driven the centre, you've plugged the bulls-eye of my dream.  Now

I'll tell you the whole thing, and you'll understand it.  I don't need to

ask you to keep it to yourself, because you'll see that the project will

prosper all the better for being kept in the background till the right

time.  Have you noticed how many pamphlets and books I've got lying

around relating to Russia?"



"Yes, I think most anybody would notice that--anybody who wasn't dead."



"Well, I've been posting myself a good while.  That's a great and,

splendid nation, and deserves to be set free."  He paused, then added in

a quite matter-of-fact way, "When I get this money I'm going to set it

free."



"Great guns!"



"Why, what makes you jump like that?"



"Dear me, when you are going to drop a remark under a man's chair that is

likely to blow him out through the roof, why don't you put some

expression, some force, some noise unto it that will prepare him?  You

shouldn't flip out such a gigantic thing as this in that colorless kind

of a way.  You do jolt a person up, so.  Go on, now, I'm all right again.

Tell me all about it.  I'm all interest--yes, and sympathy, too."



"Well, I've looked the ground over, and concluded that the methods of the

Russian patriots, while good enough considering the way the boys are

hampered, are not the best; at least not the quickest.  They are trying

to revolutionize Russia from within; that's pretty slow, you know, and

liable to interruption all the time, and is full of perils for the

workers.  Do you know how Peter the Great started his army?  He didn't

start it on the family premises under the noses of the Strelitzes; no, he

started it away off yonder, privately,--only just one regiment, you know,

and he built to that.  The first thing the Strelitzes knew, the regiment

was an army, their position was turned, and they had to take a walk.

Just that little idea made the biggest and worst of all the despotisms

the world has seen.  The same idea can unmake it.  I'm going to prove it.

I'm going to get out to one side and work my scheme the way Peter did."



"This is mighty interesting, Rossmore.  What is it you are, going to do?"



"I am going to buy Siberia and start a republic."



"There,--bang you go again, without giving any notice!  Going to buy it?"



"Yes, as soon as I get the money.  I don't care what the price is, I

shall take it.  I can afford it, and I will.  Now then, consider this--

and you've never thought of it, I'll warrant.  Where is the place where

there is twenty-five times more manhood, pluck, true heroism,

unselfishness, devotion to high and noble ideals, adoration of liberty,

wide education, and brains, per thousand of population, than any other

domain in the whole world can show?"



"Siberia!"



"Right."



"It is true; it certainly is true, but I never thought of it before."



"Nobody ever thinks of it.  But it's so, just the same.  In those mines

and prisons are gathered together the very finest and noblest and

capablest multitude of human beings that God is able to create.  Now if

you had that kind of a population to sell, would you offer it to a

despotism?  No, the despotism has no use for it; you would lose money.

A despotism has no use for anything but human cattle.  But suppose you

want to start a republic?"



"Yes, I see.  It's just the material for it."



"Well, I should say so!  There's Siberia with just the very finest and

choicest material on the globe for a republic, and more coming--more

coming all the time, don't you see!  It is being daily, weekly, monthly

recruited by the most perfectly devised system that has ever been

invented, perhaps.  By this system the whole of the hundred millions of

Russia are being constantly and patiently sifted, sifted, sifted, by

myriads of trained experts, spies appointed by the Emperor personally;

and whenever they catch a man, woman or child that has got any brains or

education or character, they ship that person straight to Siberia.  It is

admirable, it is wonderful.  It is so searching and so effective that it

keeps the general level of Russian intellect and education down to that

of the Czar."



"Come, that sounds like exaggeration."



"Well, it's what they say anyway.  But I think, myself, it's a lie.  And

it doesn't seem right to slander a whole nation that way, anyhow.  Now,

then, you see what the material is, there in Siberia, for a republic."

He paused, and his breast began to heave and his eye to burn, under the

impulse of strong emotion.  Then his words began to stream forth, with

constantly increasing energy and fire, and he rose to his feet as if to

give himself larger freedom.  "The minute I organize that republic, the

light of liberty, intelligence, justice, humanity, bursting from it,

flooding from it, flaming from it, will concentrate the gaze of the whole

astonished world as upon the miracle of a new sun; Russia's countless

multitudes of slaves will rise up and march, march!--eastward, with that

great light transfiguring their faces as they come, and far back of them

you will see-what will you see?--a vacant throne in an empty land!  It

can be done, and by God I will do it!"



He stood a moment bereft of earthy consciousness by his exaltation; then

consciousness returned, bringing him a slight shock, and he said with

grave earnestness:



"I must ask you to pardon me, Major Hawkins.  I have never used that

expression before, and I beg you will forgive it this time."



Hawkins was quite willing.



"You see, Washington, it is an error which I am by nature not liable to.

Only excitable people, impulsive people, are exposed to it.  But the

circumstances of the present case--I being a democrat by birth and

preference, and an aristocrat by inheritance and relish--"



The earl stopped suddenly, his frame stiffened, and he began to stare

speechless through the curtainless window.  Then he pointed, and gasped

out a single rapturous word:



"Look!"



"What is it, Colonel?"



"IT!"



"No!"



"Sure as you're born.  Keep perfectly still.  I'll apply the influence--

I'll turn on all my force.  I've brought It thus far--I'll fetch It right

into the house.  You'll see."



He was making all sorts of passes in the air with his hands.



"There!  Look at that.  I've made It smile!  See?"



Quite true.  Tracy, out for an afternoon stroll, had come unexpectantly

upon his family arms displayed upon this shabby house-front.  The

hatchments made him smile; which was nothing, they had made the

neighborhood cats do that.



"Look, Hawkins, look!  I'm drawing It over!"



"You're drawing it sure, Rossmore.  If I ever had any doubts about

materialization, they're gone, now, and gone for good.  Oh, this is a

joyful day!"



Tracy was sauntering over to read the door-plate.  Before he was half way

over he was saying to himself, "Why, manifestly these are the American

Claimant's quarters."



"It's coming--coming right along.  I'll slide, down and pull It in.  You

follow after me."



Sellers, pale and a good deal agitated, opened the door and confronted

Tracy.  The old man could not at once get his voice: then he pumped out a

scattering and hardly coherent salutation, and followed it with--



"Walk in, walk right in, Mr.--er--"



"Tracy--Howard Tracy."



"Tracy--thanks--walk right in, you're expected."



Tracy entered, considerably puzzled, and said:



"Expected?  I think there must be some mistake."



"Oh, I judge not," said Sellers, who--noticing that Hawkins had arrived,

gave him a sidewise glance intended to call his close attention to a

dramatic effect which he was proposing to produce by his next remark.

Then he said, slowly and impressively--"I am--YOU KNOW WHO."



To the astonishment of both conspirators the remark produced no dramatic

effect at all; for the new-comer responded with a quite innocent and

unembarrassed air--



"No, pardon me.  I don't know who you are.  I only suppose--but no doubt

correctly--that you are the gentleman whose title is on the doorplate."



"Right, quite right--sit down, pray sit down."  The earl was rattled,

thrown off his bearings, his head was in a whirl.  Then he noticed

Hawkins standing apart and staring idiotically at what to him was the

apparition of a defunct man, and a new idea was born to him.  He said to

Tracy briskly:



"But a thousand pardons, dear sir, I am forgetting courtesies due to a

guest and stranger.  Let me introduce my friend General Hawkins--General

Hawkins, our new Senator--Senator from the latest and grandest addition to

the radiant galaxy of sovereign States, Cherokee Strip"--(to himself,

"that name will shrivel him up!"--but it didn't, in the least, and the

Colonel resumed the introduction piteously disheartened and amazed),--

"Senator Hawkins, Mr.  Howard Tracy, of--er--"



"England."



"England!--Why that's im--"



"England, yes, native of England."



"Recently from there?"



"Yes, quite recently."



Said the Colonel to himself, "This phantom lies like an expert.

Purifying this kind by fire don't work.  I'll sound him a little further,

give him another chance or two to work his gift."  Then aloud--with deep

irony--



"Visiting our great country for recreation and amusement, no doubt.

I suppose you find that traveling in the majestic expanses of our Far

West is--"



"I haven't been West, and haven't been devoting myself to amusement with

any sort of exclusiveness, I assure you.  In fact, to merely live, an

artist has got to work, not play."



"Artist!" said Hawkins to himself, thinking of the rifled bank; "that is

a name for it!"



"Are you an artist?" asked the colonel; and added to himself, "now I'm

going to catch him."



"In a humble way, yes."



"What line?" pursued the sly veteran.



"Oils."



"I've got him!" said Sellers to himself.  Then aloud, "This is fortunate.

Could I engage you to restore some of my paintings that need that

attention?"



"I shall be very glad.  Pray let me see them."



No shuffling, no evasion, no embarrassment, even under this crucial test.

The Colonel was nonplussed.  He led Tracy to a chromo which had suffered

damage in a former owner's hands through being used as a lamp mat, and

said, with a flourish of his hand toward the picture--



"This del Sarto--"



"Is that a del Sarto?"



The colonel bent a look of reproach upon Tracy, allowed it to sink home,

then resumed as if there had been no interruption--



"This del Sarto is perhaps the only original of that sublime master in

our country.  You see, yourself, that the work is of such exceeding

delicacy that the risk--could--er--would you mind giving me a little

example of what you can do before we--"



"Cheerfully, cheerfully.  I will copy one of these marvels."



Water-color materials--relics of Miss Sally's college life--were brought.

Tracy said he was better in oils, but would take a chance with these.

So he was left alone.  He began his work, but the attractions of the

place were too strong for him, and he got up and went drifting about,

fascinated; also amazed.









CHAPTER XIX.



Meantime the earl and Hawkins were holding a troubled and anxious private

consultation.  The earl said:



"The mystery that bothers me, is, where did It get its other arm?"



"Yes--it worries me, too.  And another thing troubles me--the apparition

is English.  How do you account for that, Colonel?"



"Honestly, I don't know, Hawkins, I don't really know.  It is very

confusing and awful."



"Don't you think maybe we've waked up the wrong one?"



"The wrong one?  How do you account for the clothes?"



"The clothes are right, there's no getting around it.  What are we going

to do?  We can't collect, as I see.  The reward is for a one-armed

American.  This is a two-armed Englishman."



"Well, it may be that that is not objectionable.  You see it isn't less

than is called for, it is more, and so,--"



But he saw that this argument was weak, and dropped it.  The friends sat

brooding over their perplexities some time in silence.  Finally the

earl's face began to glow with an inspiration, and he said, impressively:



"Hawkins, this materialization is a grander and nobler science than we

have dreamed of.  We have little imagined what a solemn and stupendous

thing we have done.  The whole secret is perfectly clear to me, now,

clear as day.  Every man is made up of heredities, long-descended atoms

and particles of his ancestors.  This present materialization is

incomplete.  We have only brought it down to perhaps the beginning of

this century."



"What do you mean, Colonel!" cried Hawkins, filled with vague alarms by

the old man's awe-compelling words and manner.



"This.  We've materialized this burglar's ancestor!"



"Oh, don't--don't say that.  It's hideous."



"But it's true, Hawkins, I know it.  Look at the facts.  This apparition

is distinctly English--note that.  It uses good grammar--note that.  It is

an Artist--note that.  It has the manners and carriage of a gentleman--

note that.  Where's your cow-boy?  Answer me that."



"Rossmore, this is dreadful--it's too dreadful to think of!"



"Never resurrected a rag of that burglar but the clothes, not a solitary

rag of him but the clothes."



"Colonel, do you really mean--"



The Colonel brought his fist down with emphasis and said:



"I mean exactly this.  The materialization was immature, the burglar has

evaded us, this is nothing but a damned ancestor!"



He rose and walked the floor in great excitement.



Hawkins said plaintively:



"It's a bitter disappointment--bitter."



"I know it.  I know it, Senator; I feel it as deeply as anybody could.

But we've got to submit--on moral grounds.  I need money, but God knows

I am not poor enough or shabby enough to be an accessory to the punishing

of a man's ancestor for crimes committed by that ancestor's posterity."



"But Colonel!" implored Hawkins; "stop and think; don't be rash; you know

it's the only chance we've got to get the money; and besides, the Bible

itself says posterity to the fourth generation shall be punished for the

sins and crimes committed by ancestors four generations back that hadn't

anything to do with them; and so it's only fair to turn the rule around

and make it work both ways."



The Colonel was struck with the strong logic of this position.  He strode

up and down, and thought it painfully over.  Finally he said:



"There's reason in it; yes, there's reason in it.  And so, although it

seems a piteous thing to sweat this poor ancient devil for a burglary he

hadn't the least hand in, still if duty commands I suppose we must give

him up to the authorities."



"I would," said Hawkins, cheered and relieved, "I'd give him up if he was

a thousand ancestors compacted into one."



"Lord bless me, that's just what he is," said Sellers, with something

like a groan, "it's exactly what he is; there's a contribution in him

from every ancestor he ever had.  In him there's atoms of priests,

soldiers, crusaders, poets, and sweet and gracious women--all kinds and

conditions of folk who trod this earth in old, old centuries, and

vanished out of it ages ago, and now by act of ours they are summoned

from their holy peace to answer for gutting a one-horse bank away out on

the borders of Cherokee Strip, and it's just a howling outrage!"



"Oh, don't talk like that, Colonel; it takes the heart all out of me, and

makes me ashamed of the part I am proposing to--"



"Wait--I've got it!"



"A saving hope?  Shout it out, I am perishing."



"It's perfectly simple; a child would have thought of it.  He is all

right, not a flaw in him, as far as I have carried the work.  If I've

been able to bring him as far as the beginning of this century, what's to

stop me now?  I'll go on and materialize him down to date."



"Land, I never thought of that!" said Hawkins all ablaze with joy again.

"It's the very thing.  What a brain you have got!  And will he shed the

superfluous arm?"



"He will."



"And lose his English accent?"



"It will wholly disappear.  He will speak Cherokee Strip--and other forms

of profanity."



"Colonel, maybe he'll confess!"



"Confess?  Merely that bank robbery?"



"Merely?  Yes, but why 'merely'?"



The Colonel said in his most impressive manner: "Hawkins, he will be

wholly under my command.  I will make him confess every crime he ever

committed.  There must be a thousand.  Do you get the idea?"



"Well--not quite."



"The rewards will come to us."



"Prodigious conception!  I never saw such ahead for seeing with a

lightning glance all the outlying ramifications and possibilities of a

central idea."



"It is nothing; it comes natural to me.  When his time is out in one jail

he goes to the next and the next, and we shall have nothing to do but

collect the rewards as he goes along.  It is a perfectly steady income as

long as we live, Hawkins.  And much better than other kinds of

investments, because he is indestructible."



"It looks--it really does look the way you say; it does indeed."



"Look?--why it is.  It will not be denied that I have had a pretty wide

and comprehensive financial experience, and I do not hesitate to say that

I consider this one of the most valuable properties I have ever

controlled."



"Do you really think so?"



"I do, indeed."



"O, Colonel, the wasting grind and grief of poverty!  If we could realize

immediately.  I don't mean sell it all, but sell part--enough, you know,

to--"



"See how you tremble with excitement.  That comes of lack of experience.

My boy, when you have been familiar with vast operations as long as I

have, you'll be different.  Look at me; is my eye dilated? do you notice

a quiver anywhere?  Feel my pulse: plunk-plunk-plunk--same as if I were

asleep.  And yet, what is passing through my calm cold mind?  A

procession of figures which would make a financial novice drunk just the

sight of them.  Now it is by keeping cool, and looking at a thing all

around, that a man sees what's really in it, and saves himself from the

novice's unfailing mistake--the one you've just suggested--eagerness to

realize.  Listen to me.  Your idea is to sell a part of him for ready

cash.  Now mine is--guess."



"I haven't an idea.  What is it?"



"Stock him--of course."



"Well, I should never have thought of that."



"Because you are not a financier.  Say he has committed a thousand

crimes.  Certainly that's a low estimate.  By the look of him, even in

his unfinished condition, he has committed all of a million.  But call it

only a thousand to be perfectly safe; five thousand reward, multiplied by

a thousand, gives us a dead sure cash basis of--what?  Five million

dollars!"



"Wait--let me get my breath."



"And the property indestructible.  Perpetually fruitful--perpetually; for

a property with his disposition will go on committing crimes and winning

rewards."



"You daze me, you make my head whirl!"



"Let it whirl, it won't do it any harm.  Now that matter is all fixed--

leave it alone.  I'll get up the company and issue the stock, all in good

time.  Just leave it in my hands.  I judge you don't doubt my ability to

work it up for all it is worth."



"Indeed I don't.  I can say that with truth."



"All right, then.  That's disposed of.  Everything in its turn.  We old

operators, go by order and system--no helter-skelter business with us.

What's the next thing on the docket?  The carrying on of the

materialization--the bringing it down to date.  I will begin on that at

once.  I think--



"Look here, Rossmore.  You didn't lock It in.  A hundred to one it has

escaped!"



"Calm yourself, as to that; don't give yourself any uneasiness."



"But why shouldn't it escape?"



"Let it, if it wants to?  What of it?"



"Well, I should consider it a pretty serious calamity."



"Why, my dear boy, once in my power, always in my power.  It may go and

come freely.  I can produce it here whenever I want it, just by the

exercise of my will."



"Well, I am truly glad to hear that, I do assure you."



"Yes, I shall give it all the painting it wants to do, and we and the

family will make it as comfortable and contented as we can.  No occasion

to restrain its movements.  I hope to persuade it to remain pretty quiet,

though, because a materialization which is in a state of arrested

development must of necessity be pretty soft and flabby and

substanceless, and--er--by the way, I wonder where It comes from?"



"How?  What do you mean?"



The earl pointed significantly--and interrogatively toward the sky.

Hawkins started; then settled into deep reflection; finally shook his

head sorrowfully and pointed downwards.



"What makes you think so, Washington?"



"Well, I hardly know, but really you can see, yourself, that he doesn't

seem to be pining for his last place."



"It's well thought!  Soundly deduced.  We've done that Thing a favor.

But I believe I will pump it a little, in a quiet way, and find out if we

are right."



"How long is it going to take to finish him off and fetch him down to

date, Colonel?"



"I wish I knew, but I don't.  I am clear knocked out by this new detail--

this unforeseen necessity of working a subject down gradually from his

condition of ancestor to his ultimate result as posterity.  But I'll make

him hump himself, anyway."



"Rossmore!"



"Yes, dear.  We're in the laboratory.  Come--Hawkins is here.  Mind, now

Hawkins--he's a sound, living, human being to all the family--don't

forget that.  Here she comes."



"Keep your seats, I'm not coming in.  I just wanted to ask, who is it

that's painting down there?"



"That?  Oh, that's a young artist; young Englishman, named Tracy; very

promising--favorite pupil of Hans Christian Andersen or one of the other

old masters--Andersen I'm pretty sure it is; he's going to half-sole some

of our old Italian masterpieces.  Been talking to him?"



"Well, only a word.  I stumbled right in on him without expecting anybody

was there.  I tried to be polite to him; offered him a snack"--(Sellers

delivered a large wink to Hawkins from behind his hand), "but he

declined, and said he wasn't hungry" (another sarcastic wink); "so I

brought some apples" (doublewink), "and he ate a couple of--"



"What!" and the colonel sprang some yards toward the ceiling and came

down quaking with astonishment.



Lady Rossmore was smitten dumb with amazement.  She gazed at the sheepish

relic of Cherokee Strip, then at her husband, and then at the guest

again.  Finally she said:



"What is the matter with you, Mulberry?"



He did not answer immediately.  His back was turned; he was bending over

his chair, feeling the seat of it.  But he answered next moment, and

said:



"Ah, there it is; it was a tack."



The lady contemplated him doubtfully a moment, then said, pretty

snappishly:



"All that for a tack!  Praise goodness it wasn't a shingle nail, it would

have landed you in the Milky Way.  I do hate to have my nerves shook up

so."  And she turned on her heel and went her way.



As soon as she was safely out, the Colonel said, in a suppressed voice:



"Come--we must see for ourselves.  It must be a mistake."



They hurried softly down and peeped in.  Sellers whispered, in a sort of

despair--



It is eating!  What a grisly spectacle!  Hawkins it's horrible!  Take me

away--I can't stand--



They tottered back to the laboratory.









CHAPTER XX.



Tracy made slow progress with his work, for his mind wandered a good

deal.  Many things were puzzling him.  Finally a light burst upon him all

of a sudden--seemed to, at any rate--and he said to himself, "I've got

the clew at last--this man's mind is off its balance; I don't know how

much, but it's off a point or two, sure; off enough to explain this mess

of perplexities, anyway.  These dreadful chromos which he takes for old

masters; these villainous portraits--which to his frantic mind represent

Rossmores; the hatchments; the pompous name of this ramshackle old crib--

Rossmore Towers; and that odd assertion of his, that I was expected.  How

could I be expected? that is, Lord Berkeley.  He knows by the papers that

that person was burned up in the New Gadsby.  Why, hang it, he really

doesn't know who he was expecting; for his talk showed that he was not

expecting an Englishman, or yet an artist, yet I answer his requirements

notwithstanding.  He seems sufficiently satisfied with me.  Yes, he is a

little off; in fact I am afraid he is a good deal off, poor old

gentleman.  But he's interesting--all people in about his condition are,

I suppose.  I hope he'll like my work; I would like to come every day and

study him.  And when I write my father--ah, that hurts!  I mustn't get on

that subject; it isn't good for my spirits.  Somebody coming--I must get

to work.  It's the old gentleman again.  He looks bothered.  Maybe my

clothes are suspicious; and they are--for an artist.  If my conscience

would allow me to make a change, but that is out of the question.

I wonder what he's making those passes in the air for, with his hands.

I seem to be the object of them.  Can he be trying to mesmerize me?

I don't quite like it.  There's something uncanny about it."



The colonel muttered to himself, "It has an effect on him, I can see it

myself.  That's enough for one time, I reckon.  He's not very solid, yet,

I suppose, and I might disintegrate him.  I'll just put a sly question or

two at him, now, and see if I can find out what his condition is, and

where he's from."



He approached and said affably:



"Don't let me disturb you, Mr.  Tracy; I only want to take a little

glimpse of your work.  Ah, that's fine--that's very fine indeed.  You are

doing it elegantly.  My daughter will be charmed with this.  May I sit

down by you?"



"Oh, do; I shall be glad."



"It won't disturb you?  I mean, won't dissipate your inspirations?"



Tracy laughed and said they were not ethereal enough to be very easily

discommoded.



The colonel asked a number of cautious and well-considered questions--

questions which seemed pretty odd and flighty to Tracy--but the answers

conveyed the information desired, apparently, for the colonel said to

himself, with mixed pride and gratification:



"It's a good job as far as I've got, with it.  He's solid.  Solid and

going to last, solid as the real thing."



"It's wonderful--wonderful.  I believe I could--petrify him."  After a

little he asked, warily "Do you prefer being here, or--or there?"



"There?  Where?"



"Why--er--where you've been?"



Tracy's thought flew to his boarding-house, and he answered with decision.



"Oh, here, much!"



The colonel was startled, and said to himself, "There's no uncertain ring

about that.  It indicates where he's been to, poor fellow.  Well, I am

satisfied, now.  I'm glad I got him out."



He sat thinking, and thinking, and watching the brush go.  At length he

said to himself, "Yes, it certainly seems to account for the failure of

my endeavors in poor Berkeley's case.  He went in the other direction.

Well, it's all right.  He's better off."



Sally Sellers entered from the street, now, looking her divinest, and the

artist was introduced to her.  It was a violent case of mutual love at

first sight, though neither party was entirely aware of the fact,

perhaps.  The Englishman made this irrelevant remark to himself, "Perhaps

he is not insane, after all."  Sally sat down, and showed an interest in

Tracy's work which greatly pleased him, and a benevolent forgiveness of

it which convinced him that the girl's nature was cast in a large mould.

Sellers was anxious to report his discoveries to Hawkins; so he took his

leave, saying that if the two "young devotees of the colored Muse"

thought they could manage without him, he would go and look after his

affairs.  The artist said to himself, "I think he is a little eccentric,

perhaps, but that is all."  He reproached himself for having injuriously

judged a man without giving him any fair chance to show what he really

was.



Of course the stranger was very soon at his ease and chatting along

comfortably.  The average American girl possesses the valuable qualities

of naturalness, honesty, and inoffensive straightforwardness; she is

nearly barren of troublesome conventions and artificialities,

consequently her presence and her ways are unembarrassing, and one is

acquainted with her and on the pleasantest terms with her before he knows

how it came about.  This new acquaintanceship--friendship, indeed--

progressed swiftly; and the unusual swiftness of it, and the thoroughness

of it are sufficiently evidenced and established by one noteworthy fact--

that within the first half hour both parties had ceased to be conscious

of Tracy's clothes.  Later this consciousness was re-awakened; it was

then apparent to Gwendolen that she was almost reconciled to them, and it

was apparent to Tracy that he wasn't.  The re-awakening was brought about

by Gwendolen's inviting the artist to stay to dinner.  He had to decline,

because he wanted to live, now--that is, now that there was something to

live for--and he could not survive in those clothes at a gentleman's

table.  He thought he knew that.  But he went away happy, for he saw that

Gwendolen was disappointed.



And whither did he go?  He went straight to a slopshop and bought as neat

and reasonably well-fitting a suit of clothes as an Englishman could be

persuaded to wear.  He said--to himself, but at his conscience--"I know

it's wrong; but it would be wrong not to do it; and two wrongs do not

make a right."



This satisfied him, and made his heart light.  Perhaps it will also

satisfy the reader--if he can make out what it means.



The old people were troubled about Gwendolen at dinner, because she was

so distraught and silent.  If they had noticed, they would have found

that she was sufficiently alert and interested whenever the talk stumbled

upon the artist and his work; but they didn't notice, and so the chat

would swap around to some other subject, and then somebody would

presently be privately worrying about Gwendolen again, and wondering if

she were not well, or if something had gone wrong in the millinery line.

Her mother offered her various reputable patent medicines, and tonics

with iron and other hardware in them, and her father even proposed to

send out for wine, relentless prohibitionist and head of the order in the

District of Columbia as he was, but these kindnesses were all declined--

thankfully, but with decision.  At bedtime, when the family were breaking

up for the night, she privately looted one of the brushes, saying to

herself, "It's the one he has used, the most."



The next morning Tracy went forth wearing his new suit, and equipped with

a pink in his button-hole--a daily attention from Puss.  His whole soul

was full of Gwendolen Sellers, and this condition was an inspiration,

art-wise.  All the morning his brush pawed nimbly away at the canvases,

almost without his awarity--awarity, in this sense being the sense of

being aware, though disputed by some authorities--turning out marvel upon

marvel, in the way of decorative accessories to the portraits, with a

felicity and celerity which amazed the veterans of the firm and fetched

out of them continuous explosions of applause.



Meantime Gwendolen was losing her morning, and many dollars.  She

supposed Tracy was coming in the forenoon--a conclusion which she had

jumped to without outside help.  So she tripped down stairs every little

while from her work-parlor to arrange the brushes and things over again,

and see if he had arrived.  And when she was in her work-parlor it was

not profitable, but just the other way--as she found out to her sorrow.



She had put in her idle moments during the last little while back, in

designing a particularly rare and capable gown for herself, and this

morning she set about making it up; but she was absent minded, and made

an irremediable botch of it.  When she saw what she had done, she knew

the reason of it and the meaning of it; and she put her work away from

her and said she would accept the sign.  And from that time forth she

came no more away from the Audience Chamber, but remained there and

waited.  After luncheon she waited again.  A whole hour.  Then a great

joy welled up in her heart, for she saw him coming.  So she flew back up

stairs thankful, and could hardly wait for him to miss the principal

brush, which she had mislaid down there, but knew where she had mislaid

it.  However, all in good time the others were called in and couldn't

find the brush, and then she was sent for, and she couldn't find it

herself for some little time; but then she found it when the others had

gone away to hunt in the kitchen and down cellar and in the woodshed,

and all those other places where people look for things whose ways they

are not familiar with.  So she gave him the brush, and remarked that she

ought to have seen that everything was ready for him, but it hadn't

seemed necessary, because it was so early that she wasn't expecting--but

she stopped there, surprised at herself for what she was saying; and he

felt caught and ashamed, and said to himself, "I knew my impatience would

drag me here before I was expected, and betray me, and that is just what

it has done; she sees straight through me--and is laughing at me, inside,

of course."



Gwendolen was very much pleased, on one account, and a little the other

way in another; pleased with the new clothes and the improvement which

they had achieved; less pleased by the pink in the buttonhole.

Yesterday's pink had hardly interested her; this one was just like it,

but somehow it had got her immediate attention, and kept it.  She wished

she could think of some way of getting at its history in a properly

colorless and indifferent way.  Presently she made a venture.  She said:



"Whatever a man's age may be, he can reduce it several years by putting a

bright-colored flower in his button-hole.  I have often noticed that.

Is that your sex's reason for wearing a boutonniere?"



"I fancy not, but certainly that reason would be a sufficient one.  I've

never heard of the idea before."



"You seem to prefer pinks.  Is it on account of the color, or the form?"



"Oh no," he said, simply, "they are given to me.  I don't think I have

any preference."



"They are given to him," she said to herself, and she felt a coldness

toward that pink.  "I wonder who it is, and what she is like."  The

flower began to take up a good deal of room; it obtruded itself

everywhere, it intercepted all views, and marred them; it was becoming

exceedingly annoying and conspicuous for a little thing.  "I wonder if he

cares for her."  That thought gave her a quite definite pain.









CHAPTER XXI.



She had made everything comfortable for the artist; there was no further

pretext for staying.  So she said she would go, now, and asked him to

summon the servants in case he should need anything.  She went away

unhappy; and she left unhappiness behind her; for she carried away all

the sunshine.  The time dragged heavily for both, now.  He couldn't paint

for thinking of her; she couldn't design or millinerize with any heart,

for thinking of him.  Never before had painting seemed so empty to him,

never before had millinerizing seemed so void of interest to her.  She

had gone without repeating that dinner-invitation--an almost unendurable

disappointment to him.  On her part-well, she was suffering, too; for she

had found she couldn't invite him.  It was not hard yesterday, but it was

impossible to-day.  A thousand innocent privileges seemed to have been

filched from her unawares in the past twenty-four hours.  To-day she felt

strangely hampered, restrained of her liberty.  To-day she couldn't

propose to herself to do anything or say anything concerning this young

man without being instantly paralyzed into non-action by the fear that he

might "suspect."  Invite him to dinner to-day?  It made her shiver to

think of it.



And so her afternoon was one long fret.  Broken at intervals.  Three

times she had to go down stairs on errands--that is, she thought she had

to go down stairs on errands.  Thus, going and coming, she had six

glimpses of him, in the aggregate, without seeming to look in his

direction; and she tried to endure these electric ecstasies without

showing any sign, but they fluttered her up a good deal, and she felt

that the naturalness she was putting on was overdone and quite too

frantically sober and hysterically calm to deceive.



The painter had his share of the rapture; he had his six glimpses, and

they smote him with waves of pleasure that assaulted him, beat upon him,

washed over him deliciously, and drowned out all consciousness of what he

was doing with his brush.  So there were six places in his canvas which

had to be done over again.



At last Gwendolen got some peace of mind by sending word to the

Thompsons, in the neighborhood, that she was coming there to dinner.

She wouldn't be reminded, at that table, that there was an absentee who

ought to be a presentee--a word which she meant to look out in the

dictionary at a calmer time.



About this time the old earl dropped in for a chat with the artist, and

invited him to stay to dinner.  Tracy cramped down his joy and gratitude

by a sudden and powerful exercise of all his forces; and he felt that now

that he was going to be close to Gwendolen, and hear her voice and watch

her face during several precious hours, earth had nothing valuable to add

to his life for the present.



The earl said to himself, "This spectre can eat apples, apparently.

We shall find out, now, if that is a specialty.  I think, myself, it's a

specialty.  Apples, without doubt, constitute the spectral limit.  It was

the case with our first parents.  No, I am wrong--at least only partly

right.  The line was drawn at apples, just as in the present case, but it

was from the other direction."  The new clothes gave him a thrill of

pleasure and pride.  He said to himself, "I've got part of him down to

date, anyway."



Sellers said he was pleased with Tracy's work; and he went on and engaged

him to restore his old masters, and said he should also want him to paint

his portrait and his wife's and possibly his daughter's.  The tide of the

artist's happiness was at flood, now.  The chat flowed pleasantly along

while Tracy painted and Sellers carefully unpacked a picture which he had

brought with him.  It was a chromo; a new one, just out.  It was the

smirking, self-satisfied portrait of a man who was inundating the Union

with advertisements inviting everybody to buy his specialty, which was a

three-dollar shoe or a dress-suit or something of that kind.  The old

gentleman rested the chromo flat upon his lap and gazed down tenderly

upon it, and became silent and meditative.  Presently Tracy noticed that

he was dripping tears on it.  This touched the young fellow's sympathetic

nature, and at the same time gave him the painful sense of being an

intruder upon a sacred privacy, an observer of emotions which a stranger

ought not to witness.  But his pity rose superior to other

considerations, and compelled him to try to comfort the old mourner with

kindly words and a show of friendly interest.  He said:



"I am very sorry--is it a friend whom--"



"Ah, more than that, far more than that--a relative, the dearest I had on

earth, although I was never permitted to see him.  Yes, it is young Lord

Berkeley, who perished so heroically in the awful conflagration, what is

the matter?"



"Oh, nothing, nothing."



"It was a little startling to be so suddenly brought face to face, so to

speak, with a person one has heard so much talk about.  Is it a good

likeness?"



"Without doubt, yes.  I never saw him, but you can easily see the

resemblance to his father," said Sellers, holding up the chromo and

glancing from it to the chromo misrepresenting the Usurping Earl and back

again with an approving eye.



"Well, no--I am not sure that I make out the likeness.  It is plain that

the Usurping Earl there has a great deal of character and a long face

like a horse's, whereas his heir here is smirky, moon-faced and

characterless."



"We are all that way in the beginning--all the line," said Sellers,

undisturbed.  "We all start as moonfaced fools, then later we tadpole

along into horse-faced marvels of intellect and character.  It is by that

sign and by that fact that I detect the resemblance here and know this

portrait to be genuine and perfect.  Yes, all our family are fools at

first."



"This young man seems to meet the hereditary requirement, certainly."



"Yes, yes, he was a fool, without any doubt.  Examine the face, the shape

of the head, the expression.  It's all fool, fool, fool, straight

through."



"Thanks,--" said Tracy, involuntarily.



"Thanks?"



"I mean for explaining it to me.  Go on, please."



"As I was saying, fool is printed all over the face."



"A body can even read the details."



"What do they say?"



"Well, added up, he is a wobbler."



"A which?"



"Wobbler.  A person that's always taking a firm stand about something or

other--kind of a Gibraltar stand, he thinks, for unshakable fidelity and

everlastingness--and then, inside of a little while, he begins to wobble;

no more Gibraltar there; no, sir, a mighty ordinary commonplace weakling

wobbling--around on stilts.  That's Lord Berkeley to a dot, you can see

it look at that sheep!  But,--why are you blushing like sunset!  Dear

sir, have I unwittingly offended in some way?"



"Oh, no indeed, no indeed.  Far from it.  But it always makes me blush to

hear a man revile his own blood."  He said to himself, "How strangely his

vagrant and unguided fancies have hit upon the truth.  By accident, he

has described me.  I am that contemptible thing.  When I left England I

thought I knew myself; I thought I was a very Frederick the Great for

resolution and staying capacity; whereas in truth I am just a Wobbler,

simply a Wobbler.  Well--after all, it is at least creditable to have

high ideals and give birth to lofty resolutions; I will allow myself that

comfort."  Then he said, aloud, "Could this sheep, as you call him, breed

a great and self-sacrificing idea in his head, do you think?  Could he

meditate such a thing, for instance, as the renunciation of the earldom

and its wealth and its glories, and voluntary retirement to the ranks of

the commonalty, there to rise by his own merit or remain forever poor and

obscure?"



"Could he?  Why, look at him--look at this simpering self-righteous mug!

There is your answer.  It's the very thing he would think of.  And he

would start in to do it, too."



"And then?"



"He'd wobble."



"And back down?"



"Every time."



"Is that to happen with all my--I mean would that happen to all his high

resolutions?"



"Oh certainly--certainly.  It's the Rossmore of it."



"Then this creature was fortunate to die!  Suppose, for argument's sake,

that I was a Rossmore, and--"



"It can't be done."



"Why?"



"Because it's not a supposable case.  To be a Rossmore at your age, you'd

have to be a fool, and you're not a fool.  And you'd have to be a

Wobbler, whereas anybody that is an expert in reading character can see

at a glance that when you set your foot down once, it's there to stay;

and earthquake can't wobble it."  He added to himself, "That's enough to

say to him, but it isn't half strong enough for the facts.  The more

I observe him, now, the more remarkable I find him.  It is the strongest

face I have ever examined.  There is almost superhuman firmness here,

immovable purpose, iron steadfastness of will.  A most extraordinary

young man."



He presently said, aloud:



"Some time I want to ask your advice about a little matter, Mr.  Tracy.

You see, I've got that young lord's remaims--my goodness, how you jump!"



"Oh, it's nothing, pray go on.  You've got his remains?"



"Yes."



"Are you sure they are his, and not somebody else's?"



"Oh, perfectly sure.  Samples, I mean.  Not all of him."



"Samples?"



"Yes--in baskets.  Some time you will be going home; and if you wouldn't

mind taking them along--"



"Who?  I?"



"Yes--certainly.  I don't mean now; but after a while; after--but look

here, would you like to see them?"



"No!  Most certainly not.  I don't want to see them."



"O, very well.  I only thought--hey, where are you going, dear?"



"Out to dinner, papa."



Tracy was aghast.  The colonel said, in a disappointed voice:



"Well, I'm sorry.  Sho, I didn't know she was going out, Mr.  Tracy."



Gwendolen's face began to take on a sort of apprehensive 'What-have-I-

done expression.'



"Three old people to one young one--well, it isn't a good team, that's a

fact."



Gwendolen's face betrayed a dawning hopefulness and she said--with a tone

of reluctance which hadn't the hall-mark on it:



"If you prefer, I will send word to the Thompsons that I--"



"Oh, is it the Thompsons?  That simplifies it--sets everything right.

We can fix it without spoiling your arrangements, my child.  You've got

your heart set on--"



"But papa, I'd just as soon go there some other--"



"No--I won't have it.  You are a good hard-working darling child, and

your father is not the man to disappoint you when you--"



"But papa, I--"



"Go along, I won't hear a word.  We'll get along, dear."



Gwendolen was ready to cry with venation.  But there was nothing to do

but start; which she was about to do when her father hit upon an idea

which filled him with delight because it so deftly covered all the

difficulties of the situation and made things smooth and satisfactory:



"I've got it, my love, so that you won't be robbed of your holiday and at

the same time we'll be pretty satisfactorily fixed for a good time here.

You send Belle Thompson here--perfectly beautiful creature, Tracy,

perfectly beautiful; I want you to see that girl; why, you'll just go

mad; you'll go mad inside of a minute; yes, you send her right along,

Gwendolen, and tell her--why, she's gone!"  He turned--she was already

passing out at the gate.  He muttered, "I wonder what's the matter; I

don't know what her mouth's doing, but I think her shoulders are

swearing.  Well," said Sellers blithely to Tracy, "I shall miss her--

parents always miss the children as soon as they're out of sight, it's

only a natural and wisely ordained partiality--but you'll be all right,

because Miss Belle will supply the youthful element for you and to your

entire content; and we old people will do our best, too.  We shall have a

good enough time.  And you'll have a chance to get better acquainted with

Admiral Hawkins.  That's a rare character, Mr. Tracy--one of the rarest

and most engaging characters the world has produced.  You'll find him

worth studying.  I've studied him ever since he was a child and have

always found him developing.  I really consider that one of the main

things that has enabled me to master the difficult science of

character-reading was the livid interest I always felt in that boy

and the baffling inscrutabilities of his ways and inspirations."



Tracy was not hearing a word.  His spirits were gone, he was desolate.



"Yes, a most wonderful character.  Concealment--that's the basis of it.

Always the first thing you want to do is to find the keystone a man's

character is built on--then you've got it.  No misleading and apparently

inconsistent peculiarities can fool you then.  What do you read on the

Senator's surface?  Simplicity; a kind of rank and protuberant

simplicity; whereas, in fact, that's one of the deepest minds in the

world.  A perfectly honest man--an absolutely honest and honorable man--

and yet without doubt the profoundest master of dissimulation the world

has ever seen."



"O, it's devilish!"  This was wrung from the unlistening Tracy by the

anguished thought of what might have been if only the dinner arrangements

hadn't got mixed.



"No, I shouldn't call it that," said Sellers, who was now placidly

walking up and down the room with his hands under his coat-tails and

listening to himself talk.  "One could quite properly call it devilish

in another man, but not in the Senator.  Your term is right--perfectly

right--I grant that--but the application is wrong.  It makes a great

difference.  Yes, he is a marvelous character.  I do not suppose that any

other statesman ever had such a colossal sense of humor, combined with

the ability to totally conceal it.  I may except George Washington and

Cromwell, and perhaps Robespierre, but I draw the line there.  A person

not an expert might be in Judge Hawkins's company a lifetime and never

find out he had any more sense of humor than a cemetery."



A deep-drawn yard-long sigh from the distraught and dreaming artist,

followed by a murmured, "Miserable, oh, miserable!"



"Well, no, I shouldn't say that about it, quite.  On the contrary, I

admire his ability to conceal his humor even more if possible than I

admire the gift itself, stupendous as it is.  Another thing--General

Hawkins is a thinker; a keen, logical, exhaustive, analytical thinker--

perhaps the ablest of modern times.  That is, of course, upon themes

suited to his size, like the glacial period, and the correlation of

forces, and the evolution of the Christian from the caterpillar--any of

those things; give him a subject according to his size, and just stand

back and watch him think!  Why you can see the place rock!  Ah, yes, you

must know him; you must get on the inside of him.  Perhaps the most

extraordinary mind since Aristotle."



Dinner was kept waiting for a while for Miss Thompson, but as Gwendolen

had not delivered the invitation to her the waiting did no good, and the

household presently went to the meal without her.  Poor old Sellers tried

everything his hospitable soul could devise to make the occasion an

enjoyable one for the guest, and the guest tried his honest best to be

cheery and chatty and happy for the old gentleman's sake; in fact all

hands worked hard in the interest of a mutual good time, but the thing

was a failure from the start; Tracy's heart was lead in his bosom, there

seemed to be only one prominent feature in the landscape and that was a

vacant chair, he couldn't drag his mind away from Gwendolen and his hard

luck; consequently his distractions allowed deadly pauses to slip in

every now and then when it was his turn to say something, and of course

this disease spread to the rest of the conversation--wherefore, instead

of having a breezy sail in sunny waters, as anticipated, everybody was

bailing out and praying for land.  What could the matter be?  Tracy alone

could have told, the others couldn't even invent a theory.



Meanwhile they were having a similarly dismal time at the Thompson house;

in fact a twin experience.  Gwendolen was ashamed of herself for allowing

her disappointment to so depress her spirits and make her so strangely

and profoundly miserable; but feeling ashamed of herself didn't improve

the matter any; it only seemed to aggravate the suffering.  She explained

that she was not feeling very well, and everybody could see that this was

true; so she got sincere sympathy and commiseration; but that didn't help

the case.  Nothing helps that kind of a case.  It is best to just stand

off and let it fester.  The moment the dinner was over the girl excused

herself, and she hurried home feeling unspeakably grateful to get away

from that house and that intolerable captivity and suffering.



Will he be gone?  The thought arose in her brain, but took effect in her

heels.  She slipped into the house, threw off her things and made

straight for the dining room.  She stopped and listened.  Her father's

voice--with no life in it; presently her mother's--no life in that;

a considerable vacancy, then a sterile remark from Washington Hawkins.

Another silence; then, not Tracy's but her father's voice again.



"He's gone," she said to herself despairingly, and listlessly opened the

door and stepped within.



"Why, my child," cried the mother, "how white you are!  Are you--has

anything--"



"White?" exclaimed Sellers.  "It's gone like a flash; 'twasn't serious.

Already she's as red as the soul of a watermelon!  Sit down, dear, sit

down--goodness knows you're welcome.  Did you have a good time?  We've

had great times here--immense.  Why didn't Miss Belle come?  Mr. Tracy is

not feeling well, and she'd have made him forget it."



She was content now; and out from her happy eyes there went a light that

told a secret to another pair of eyes there and got a secret in return.

In just that infinitely small fraction of a second those two great

confessions were made, received, and perfectly understood.  All anxiety,

apprehension, uncertainty, vanished out of these young people's hearts

and left them filled with a great peace.



Sellers had had the most confident faith that with the new reinforcement

victory would be at this last moment snatched from the jaws of defeat,

but it was an error.  The talk was as stubbornly disjointed as ever.

He was proud of Gwendolen, and liked to show her off, even against Miss

Belle Thompson, and here had been a great opportunity, and what had she

made of it?  He felt a good deal put out.  It vexed him to think that

this Englishman, with the traveling Briton's everlasting disposition to

generalize whole mountain ranges from single sample-grains of sand, would

jump to the conclusion that American girls were as dumb as himself--

generalizing the whole tribe from this single sample and she at her

poorest, there being nothing at that table to inspire her, give her a

start, keep her from going to sleep.  He made up his mind that for the

honor of the country he would bring these two together again over the

social board before long.  There would be a different result another

time, he judged.  He said to himself, with a deep sense of injury,

"He'll put in his diary--they all keep diaries--he'll put in his diary

that she was miraculously uninteresting--dear, dear, but wasn't she!

I never saw the like--and yet looking as beautiful as Satan, too--and

couldn't seem to do anything but paw bread crumbs, and pick flowers to

pieces, and look fidgety.  And it isn't any better here in the Hall of

Audience.  I've had enough; I'll haul down my flag--the others may fight

it out if they want to."



He shook hands all around and went off to do some work which he said was

pressing.  The idolaters were the width of the room apart; and apparently

unconscious of each other's presence.  The distance got shortened a

little, now.  Very soon the mother withdrew.  The distance narrowed

again.  Tracy stood before a chromo of some Ohio politician which had

been retouched and chain-mailed for a crusading Rossmore, and Gwendolen

was sitting on the sofa not far from his elbow artificially absorbed in

examining a photograph album that hadn't any photographs in it.



The "Senator" still lingered.  He was sorry for the young people; it had

been a dull evening for them.  In the goodness of his heart he tried to

make it pleasant for them now; tried to remove the ill impression

necessarily left by the general defeat; tried to be chatty, even tried to

be gay.  But the responses were sickly, there was no starting any

enthusiasm; he would give it up and quit--it was a day specially picked

out and consecrated to failures.



But when Gwendolen rose up promptly and smiled a glad smile and said with

thankfulness and blessing, "Must you go?" it seemed cruel to desert, and

he sat down again.



He was about to begin a remark when--when he didn't.  We have all been

there.  He didn't know how he knew his concluding to stay longer had been

a mistake, he merely knew it; and knew it for dead certain, too.  And so

he bade goodnight, and went mooning out, wondering what he could have

done that changed the atmosphere that way.  As the door closed behind him

those two were standing side by side, looking at that door--looking at it

in a waiting, second-counting, but deeply grateful kind of way.  And the

instant it closed they flung their arms about each other's necks, and

there, heart to heart and lip to lip--



"Oh, my God, she's kissing it!"



Nobody heard this remark, because Hawkins, who bred it, only thought it,

he didn't utter it.  He had turned, the moment he had closed the door,

and had pushed it open a little, intending to re-enter and ask what

ill-advised thing he had done or said, and apologize for it.  But he

didn't re-enter; he staggered off stunned, terrified, distressed.









CHAPTER XXII.



Five minutes later he was sitting in his room, with his head bowed within

the circle of his arms, on the table--final attitude of grief and despair.

His tears were flowing fast, and now and then a sob broke upon the

stillness.  Presently he said:



"I knew her when she was a little child and used to climb about my knees;

I love her as I love my own, and now--oh, poor thing, poor thing, I

cannot bear it!--she's gone and lost her heart to this mangy

materializee!  Why didn't we see that that might happen?  But how could

we?  Nobody could; nobody could ever have dreamed of such a thing.  You

couldn't expect a person would fall in love with a wax-work.  And this

one doesn't even amount to that."



He went on grieving to himself, and now and then giving voice to his

lamentations.



"It's done, oh, it's done, and there's no help for it, no undoing the

miserable business.  If I had the nerve, I would kill it.  But that

wouldn't do any good.  She loves it; she thinks it's genuine and

authentic.  If she lost it she would grieve for it just as she would for

a real person.  And who's to break it to the family!  Not I--I'll die

first.  Sellers is the best human being I ever knew and I wouldn't any

more think of--oh, dear, why it'll break his heart when he finds it out.

And Polly's too.  This comes of meddling with such infernal matters!

But for this, the creature would still be roasting in Sheol where it

belongs.  How is it that these people don't smell the brimstone?

Sometimes I can't come into the same room with him without nearly

suffocating."



After a while he broke out again:



"Well, there's one thing, sure.  The materializing has got to stop right

where it is.  If she's got to marry a spectre, let her marry a decent one

out of the Middle Ages, like this one--not a cowboy and a thief such as

this protoplasmic tadpole's going to turn into if Sellers keeps on

fussing at it.  It costs five thousand dollars cash and shuts down on the

incorporated company to stop the works at this point, but Sally Sellers's

happiness is worth more than that."



He heard Sellers coming, and got himself to rights.  Sellers took a seat,

and said:



"Well, I've got to confess I'm a good deal puzzled.  It did certainly

eat, there's no getting around it.  Not eat, exactly, either, but it

nibbled; nibbled in an appetiteless way, but still it nibbled; and that's

just a marvel.  Now the question is, what does it do with those

nibblings?  That's it--what does it do with them?  My idea is that we

don't begin to know all there is to this stupendous discovery yet.

But time will show--time and science--give us a chance, and don't get

impatient."



But he couldn't get Hawkins interested; couldn't make him talk to amount

to anything; couldn't drag him out of his depression.  But at last he

took a turn that arrested Hawkins's attention.



"I'm coming to like him, Hawkins.  He is a person of stupendous

character--absolutely gigantic.  Under that placid exterior is concealed

the most dare-devil spirit that was ever put into a man--he's just a

Clive over again.  Yes, I'm all admiration for him, on account of his

character, and liking naturally follows admiration, you know.  I'm coming

to like him immensely.  Do you know, I haven't the heart to degrade such

a character as that down to the burglar estate for money or for anything

else; and I've come to ask if you are willing to let the reward go, and

leave this poor fellow--"



"Where he is?"



"Yes--not bring him down to date."



"Oh, there's my hand; and my heart's in it, too!"



"I'll never forget you for this, Hawkins," said the old gentleman in a

voice which he found it hard to control.  "You are making a great

sacrifice for me, and one which you can ill afford, but I'll never forget

your generosity, and if I live you shall not suffer for it, be sure of

that."



Sally Sellers immediately and vividly realized that she was become a new

being; a being of a far higher and worthier sort than she had been such a

little while before; an earnest being, in place of a dreamer; and

supplied with a reason for her presence in the world, where merely a

wistful and troubled curiosity about it had existed before.  So great and

so comprehensive was the change which had been wrought, that she seemed

to herself to be a real person who had lately been a shadow; a something

which had lately been a nothing; a purpose, which had lately been a

fancy; a finished temple, with the altar-fires lit and the voice of

worship ascending, where before had been but an architect's confusion of

arid working plans, unintelligible to the passing eye and prophesying

nothing.



"Lady" Gwendolen!  The pleasantness of that sound was all gone; it was an

offense to her ear now.  She said:



"There--that sham belongs to the past; I will not be called by it any

more."



"I may call you simply Gwendolen?  You will allow me to drop the

formalities straightway and name you by your dear first name without

additions?"



She was dethroning the pink and replacing it with a rosebud.



"There--that is better.  I hate pinks--some pinks.  Indeed yes, you are to

call me by my first name without additions--that is,--well, I don't mean

without additions entirely, but--"



It was as far as she could get.  There was a pause; his intellect was

struggling to comprehend; presently it did manage to catch the idea in

time to save embarrassment all around, and he said gratefully--



"Dear Gwendolen!  I may say that?"



"Yes--part of it.  But--don't kiss me when I am talking, it makes me

forget what I was going to say.  You can call me by part of that form,

but not the last part.  Gwendolen is not my name."



"Not your name?" This in a tone of wonder and surprise.



The girl's soul was suddenly invaded by a creepy apprehension, a quite

definite sense of suspicion and alarm.  She put his arms away from her,

looked him searchingly in the eye, and said:



"Answer me truly, on your honor.  You are not seeking to marry me on

account of my rank?"



The shot almost knocked him through the wall, he was so little prepared

for it.  There was something so finely grotesque about the question and

its parent suspicion, that he stopped to wonder and admire, and thus was

he saved from laughing.  Then, without wasting precious time, he set

about the task of convincing her that he had been lured by herself alone,

and had fallen in love with her only, not her title and position; that he

loved her with all his heart, and could not love her more if she were a

duchess, or less if she were without home, name or family.  She watched

his face wistfully, eagerly, hopefully, translating his words by its

expression; and when he had finished there was gladness in her heart--

a tumultuous gladness, indeed, though outwardly she was calm, tranquil,

even judicially austere.  She prepared a surprise for him, now,

calculated to put a heavy strain upon those disinterested protestations

of his; and thus she delivered it, burning it away word by word as the

fuse burns down to a bombshell, and watching to see how far the explosion

would lift him:



"Listen--and do not doubt me, for I shall speak the exact truth.  Howard

Tracy, I am no more an earl's child than you are!"



To her joy--and secret surprise, also--it never phased him.  He was

ready, this time, and saw his chance.  He cried out with enthusiasm,

"Thank heaven for that!" and gathered her to his arms.



To express her happiness was almost beyond her gift of speech.



"You make me the proudest girl in all the earth," she said, with her head

pillowed on his shoulder.  "I thought it only natural that you should be

dazzled by the title--maybe even unconsciously, you being English--and

that you might be deceiving yourself in thinking you loved only me, and

find you didn't love me when the deception was swept away; so it makes me

proud that the revelation stands for nothing and that you do love just

me, only me--oh, prouder than any words can tell!"



"It is only you, sweetheart, I never gave one envying glance toward your

father's earldom.  That is utterly true, dear Gwendolen."



"There--you mustn't call me that.  I hate that false name.  I told you it

wasn't mine.  My name is Sally Sellers--or Sarah, if you like.  From this

time I banish dreams, visions, imaginings, and will no more of them.

I am going to be myself--my genuine self, my honest self, my natural

self, clear and clean of sham and folly and fraud, and worthy of you.

There is no grain of social inequality between us; I, like you, am poor;

I, like you, am without position or distinction; you are a struggling

artist, I am that, too, in my humbler way.  Our bread is honest bread,

we work for our living.  Hand in hand we will walk hence to the grave,

helping each other in all ways, living for each other, being and

remaining one in heart and purpose, one in hope and aspiration,

inseparable to the end.  And though our place is low, judged by the

world's eye, we will make it as high as the highest in the great

essentials of honest work for what we eat and wear, and conduct above

reproach.  We live in a land, let us be thankful, where this is

all-sufficient, and no man is better than his neighbor by the grace

of God, but only by his own merit."



Tracy tried to break in, but she stopped him and kept the floor herself.



"I am not through yet.  I am going to purge myself of the last vestiges

of artificiality and pretence, and then start fair on your own honest

level and be worthy mate to you thenceforth.  My father honestly thinks

he is an earl.  Well, leave him his dream, it pleases him and does no one

any harm: It was the dream of his ancestors before him.  It has made

fools of the house of Sellers for generations, and it made something of a

fool of me, but took no deep root.  I am done with it now, and for good.

Forty-eight hours ago I was privately proud of being the daughter of a

pinchbeck earl, and thought the proper mate for me must be a man of like

degree; but to-day--oh, how grateful I am for your love which has healed

my sick brain and restored my sanity!--I could make oath that no earl's

son in all the world--"



"Oh,--well, but--but--"



"Why, you look like a person in a panic.  What is it?  What is the

matter?"



"Matter?  Oh, nothing--nothing.  I was only going to say"--but in his

flurry nothing occurred to him to say, for a moment; then by a lucky

inspiration he thought of something entirely sufficient for the occasion,

and brought it out with eloquent force: "Oh, how beautiful you are!  You

take my breath away when you look like that."



It was well conceived, well timed, and cordially delivered--and it got

its reward.



"Let me see.  Where was I?  Yes, my father's earldom is pure moonshine.

Look at those dreadful things on the wall.  You have of course supposed

them to be portraits of his ancestors, earls of Rossmore.  Well, they are

not.  They are chromos of distinguished Americans--all moderns; but he

has carried them back a thousand years by re-labeling them.  Andrew

Jackson there, is doing what he can to be the late American earl; and the

newest treasure in the collection is supposed to be the young English

heir--I mean the idiot with the crape; but in truth it's a shoemaker, and

not Lord Berkeley at all."



"Are you sure?"



"Why of course I am.  He wouldn't look like that."



"Why?"



"Because his conduct in his last moments, when the fire was sweeping

around him shows that he was a man.  It shows that he was a fine,

high-souled young creature."



Tracy was strongly moved by these compliments, and it seemed to him that

the girl's lovely lips took on anew loveliness when they were delivering

them.  He said, softly:



"It is a pity he could not know what a gracious impression his behavior

was going to leave with the dearest and sweetest stranger in the

land of--"



"Oh, I almost loved him!  Why, I think of him every day.  He is always

floating about in my mind."



Tracy felt that this was a little more than was necessary.  He was

conscious of the sting of jealousy.  He said:



"It is quite right to think of him--at least now and then--that is, at

intervals--in perhaps an admiring way--but it seems to me that--"



"Howard Tracy, are you jealous of that dead man?"



He was ashamed--and at the same time not ashamed.  He was jealous--and at

the same time he was not jealous.  In a sense the dead man was himself;

in that case compliments and affection lavished upon that corpse went

into his own till and were clear profit.  But in another sense the dead

man was not himself; and in that case all compliments and affection

lavished there were wasted, and a sufficient basis for jealousy.  A tiff

was the result of the dispute between the two.  Then they made it up, and

were more loving than ever.  As an affectionate clincher of the

reconciliation, Sally declared that she had now banished Lord Berkeley

from her mind; and added, "And in order to make sure that he shall never

make trouble between us again, I will teach myself to detest that name

and all that have ever borne it or ever shall bear it."



This inflicted another pang, and Tracy was minded to ask her to modify

that a little just on general principles, and as practice in not

overdoing a good thing--perhaps he might better leave things as they were

and not risk bringing on another tiff.  He got away from that particular,

and sought less tender ground for conversation.



"I suppose you disapprove wholly of aristocracies and nobilities, now

that you have renounced your title and your father's earldom."



"Real ones?  Oh, dear no--but I've thrown aside our sham one for good."



This answer fell just at the right time and just in the right place, to

save the poor unstable young man from changing his political complexion

once more.  He had been on the point of beginning to totter again, but

this prop shored him up and kept him from floundering back into democracy

and re-renouncing aristocracy.  So he went home glad that he had asked

the fortunate question.  The girl would accept a little thing like a

genuine earldom, she was merely prejudiced against the brummagem article.

Yes, he could have his girl and have his earldom, too: that question was

a fortunate stroke.



Sally went to bed happy, too; and remained happy, deliriously happy, for

nearly two hours; but at last, just as she was sinking into a contented

and luxurious unconsciousness, the shady devil who lives and lurks and

hides and watches inside of human beings and is always waiting for a

chance to do the proprietor a malicious damage, whispered to her soul and

said, "That question had a harmless look, but what was back of it?--what

was the secret motive of it?--what suggested it?"



The shady devil had knifed her, and could retire, now, and take a rest;

the wound would attend to business for him.  And it did.



Why should Howard Tracy ask that question?  If he was not trying to marry

her for the sake of her rank, what should suggest that question to him?

Didn't he plainly look gratified when she said her objections to

aristocracy had their limitations?  Ah, he is after that earldom, that

gilded sham--it isn't poor me he wants.



So she argued, in anguish and tears.  Then she argued the opposite

theory, but made a weak, poor business of it, and lost the case.  She

kept the arguing up, one side and then the other, the rest of the night,

and at last fell asleep at dawn; fell in the fire at dawn, one may say;

for that kind of sleep resembles fire, and one comes out of it with his

brain baked and his physical forces fried out of him.









CHAPTER XXIII.



Tracy wrote his father before he sought his bed.  He wrote a letter which

he believed would get better treatment than his cablegram received, for

it contained what ought to be welcome news; namely, that he had tried

equality and working for a living; had made a fight which he could find

no reason to be ashamed of, and in the matter of earning a living had

proved that he was able to do it; but that on the whole he had arrived at

the conclusion that he could not reform the world single-handed, and was

willing to retire from the conflict with the fair degree of honor which

he had gained, and was also willing to return home and resume his

position and be content with it and thankful for it for the future,

leaving further experiment of a missionary sort to other young people

needing the chastening and quelling persuasions of experience, the only

logic sure to convince a diseased imagination and restore it to rugged

health.  Then he approached the subject of marriage with the daughter of

the American Claimant with a good deal of caution and much painstaking

art.  He said praiseful and appreciative things about the girl, but

didn't dwell upon that detail or make it prominent.  The thing which he

made prominent was the opportunity now so happily afforded, to reconcile

York and Lancaster, graft the warring roses upon one stem, and end

forever a crying injustice which had already lasted far too long.  One

could infer that he had thought this thing all out and chosen this way of

making all things fair and right because it was sufficiently fair and

considerably wiser than the renunciation-scheme which he had brought with

him from England.  One could infer that, but he didn't say it.  In fact

the more he read his letter over, the more he got to inferring it

himself.



When the old earl received that letter, the first part of it filled him

with a grim and snarly satisfaction; but the rest of it brought a snort

or two out of him that could be translated differently.  He wasted no ink

in this emergency, either in cablegrams or letters; he promptly took ship

for America to look into the matter himself.  He had staunchly held his

grip all this long time, and given no sign of the hunger at his heart to

see his son; hoping for the cure of his insane dream, and resolute that

the process should go through all the necessary stages without assuaging

telegrams or other nonsense from home, and here was victory at last.

Victory, but stupidly marred by this idiotic marriage project.  Yes, he

would step over and take a hand in this matter himself.



During the first ten days following the mailing of the letter Tracy's

spirits had no idle time; they were always climbing up into the clouds or

sliding down into the earth as deep as the law of gravitation reached.

He was intensely happy or intensely miserable by turns, according to Miss

Sally's moods.  He never could tell when the mood was going to change,

and when it changed he couldn't tell what it was that had changed it.

Sometimes she was so in love with him that her love was tropical, torrid,

and she could find no language fervent enough for its expression; then

suddenly, and without warning or any apparent reason, the weather would

change, and the victim would find himself adrift among the icebergs and

feeling as lonesome and friendless as the north pole.  It sometimes

seemed to him that a man might better be dead than exposed to these

devastating varieties of climate.



The case was simple.  Sally wanted to believe that Tracy's preference was

disinterested; so she was always applying little tests of one sort or

another, hoping and expecting that they would bring out evidence which

would confirm or fortify her belief.  Poor Tracy did not know that these

experiments were being made upon him, consequently he walked promptly

into all the traps the girl set for him.  These traps consisted in

apparently casual references to social distinction, aristocratic title

and privilege, and such things.  Often Tracy responded to these

references heedlessly and not much caring what he said provided it kept

the talk going and prolonged the seance.  He didn't suspect that the girl

was watching his face and listening for his words as one who watches the

judge's face and listens for the words which will restore him to home and

friends and freedom or shut him away from the sun and human companionship

forever.  He didn't suspect that his careless words were being weighed,

and so he often delivered sentence of death when it would have been just

as handy and all the same to him to pronounce acquittal.  Daily he broke

the girl's heart, nightly he sent her to the rack for sleep.  He couldn't

understand it.



Some people would have put this and that together and perceived that the

weather never changed until one particular subject was introduced,

and that then it always changed.  And they would have looked further,

and perceived that that subject was always introduced by the one party,

never the other.  They would have argued, then, that this was done for a

purpose.  If they could not find out what that purpose was in any simpler

or easier way, they would ask.



But Tracy was not deep enough or suspicious enough to think of these

things.  He noticed only one particular; that the weather was always

sunny when a visit began.  No matter how much it might cloud up later,

it always began with a clear sky.  He couldn't explain this curious fact

to himself, he merely knew it to be a fact.  The truth of the matter was,

that by the time Tracy had been out of Sally's sight six hours she was so

famishing for a sight of him that her doubts and suspicions were all

consumed away in the fire of that longing, and so always she came into

his presence as surprisingly radiant and joyous as she wasn't when she

went out of it.



In circumstances like these a growing portrait runs a good many risks.

The portrait of Sellers, by Tracy, was fighting along, day by day,

through this mixed weather, and daily adding to itself ineradicable signs

of the checkered life it was leading.  It was the happiest portrait, in

spots, that was ever seen; but in other spots a damned soul looked out

from it; a soul that was suffering all the different kinds of distress

there are, from stomach ache to rabies.  But Sellers liked it.  He said it

was just himself all over--a portrait that sweated moods from every pore,

and no two moods alike.  He said he had as many different kinds of

emotions in him as a jug.



It was a kind of a deadly work of art, maybe, but it was a starchy

picture for show; for it was life size, full length, and represented the

American earl in a peer's scarlet robe, with the three ermine bars

indicative of an earl's rank, and on the gray head an earl's coronet,

tilted just a wee bit to one side in a most gallus and winsome way.  When

Sally's weather was sunny the portrait made Tracy chuckle, but when her

weather was overcast it disordered his mind and stopped the circulation

of his blood.



Late one night when the sweethearts had been having a flawless visit

together, Sally's interior devil began to work his specialty, and soon

the conversation was drifting toward the customary rock.  Presently, in

the midst of Tracy's serene flow of talk, he felt a shudder which he knew

was not his shudder, but exterior to his breast although immediately

against it.  After the shudder came sobs; Sally was crying.



"Oh, my darling, what have I done--what have I said?  It has happened

again!  What have I done to wound you?"



She disengaged herself from his arms and gave him a look of deep

reproach.



"What have you done?  I will tell you what you have done.  You have

unwittingly revealed--oh, for the twentieth time, though I could not

believe it, would not believe it!--that it is not me you love, but that

foolish sham my father's imitation earldom; and you have broken my

heart!"



"Oh, my child, what are you saying!  I never dreamed of such a thing."



"Oh, Howard, Howard, the things you have uttered when you were forgetting

to guard your tongue, have betrayed you."



"Things I have uttered when I was forgetting to guard my tongue?  These

are hard words.  When have I remembered to guard it?  Never in one

instance.  It has no office but to speak the truth.  It needs no guarding

for that."



"Howard, I have noted your words and weighed them, when you were not

thinking of their significance--and they have told me more than you meant

they should."



"Do you mean to say you have answered the trust I had in you by using it

as an ambuscade from which you could set snares for my unsuspecting

tongue and be safe from detection while you did it?  You have not done

this--surely you have not done this thing.  Oh, one's enemy could not do

it."



This was an aspect of the girl's conduct which she had not clearly

perceived before.  Was it treachery?  Had she abused a trust?  The

thought crimsoned her cheeks with shame and remorse.



"Oh, forgive me," she said, "I did not know what I was doing.  I have

been so tortured--you will forgive me, you must; I have suffered so much,

and I am so sorry and so humble; you do forgive me, don't you?--don't

turn away, don't refuse me; it is only my love that is at fault, and you

know I love you, love you with all my heart; I couldn't bear to--oh,

dear, dear, I am so miserable, and I sever meant any harm, and I didn't

see where this insanity was carrying me, and how it was wronging and

abusing the dearest heart in all the world to me--and--and--oh, take me

in your arms again, I have no other refuge, no other home and hope!"



There was reconciliation again--immediate, perfect, all-embracing--and

with it utter happiness.  This would have been a good time to adjourn.

But no, now that the cloud-breeder was revealed at last; now that it was

manifest that all the sour weather had come from this girl's dread that

Tracy was lured by her rank and not herself, he resolved to lay that

ghost immediately and permanently by furnishing the best possible proof

that he couldn't have had back of him at any time the suspected motive.

So he said:



"Let me whisper a little secret in your ear--a secret which I have kept

shut up in my breast all this time.  Your rank couldn't ever have been an

enticement.  I am son and heir to an English earl!"



The girl stared at him--one, two, three moments, maybe a dozen--then her

lips parted:



"You?" she said, and moved away from him, still gazing at him in a kind

of blank amazement.



"Why--why, certainly I am.  Why do you act like this?  What have I done

now?"



"What have you done?  You have certainly made a most strange statement.

You must see that yourself."



"Well," with a timid little laugh, "it may be a strange enough statement;

but of what consequence is that, if it is true?"



"If it is true.  You are already retiring from it."



"Oh, not for a moment!  You should not say that.  I have not deserved it.

I have spoken the truth; why do you doubt it?"



Her reply was prompt.



"Simply because you didn't speak it earlier!"



"Oh!" It wasn't a groan, exactly, but it was an intelligible enough

expression of the fact that he saw the point and recognized that there

was reason in it.



"You have seemed to conceal nothing from me that I ought to know

concerning yourself, and you were not privileged to keep back such a

thing as this from me a moment after--after--well, after you had

determined to pay your court to me."



"Its true, it's true, I know it!  But there were circumstances--in--

in the way--circumstances which--"



She waved the circumstances aside.



"Well, you see," he said, pleadingly, "you seemed so bent on our

traveling the proud path of honest labor and honorable poverty, that I

was terrified--that is, I was afraid--of--of--well, you know how you

talked."



"Yes, I know how I talked.  And I also know that before the talk was

finished you inquired how I stood as regards aristocracies, and my answer

was calculated to relieve your fears."



He was silent a while.  Then he said, in a discouraged way:



"I don't see any way out of it.  It was a mistake.  That is in truth all

it was, just a mistake.  No harm was meant, no harm in the world.

I didn't see how it might some time look.  It is my way.  I don't seem to

see far."



The girl was almost disarmed, for a moment.  Then she flared up again.



"An Earl's son!  Do earls' sons go about working in lowly callings for

their bread and butter?"



"God knows they don't!  I have wished they did."



"Do earls' sons sink their degree in a country like this, and come sober

and decent to sue for the hand of a born child of poverty when they can

go drunk, profane, and steeped in dishonorable debt and buy the pick and

choice of the millionaires' daughters of America?  You an earl's son!

Show me the signs."



"I thank God I am not able--if those are the signs.  But yet I am an

earl's son and heir.  It is all I can say.  I wish you would believe me,

but you will not.  I know no way to persuade you."



She was about to soften again, but his closing remark made her bring her

foot down with smart vexation, and she cried out:



"Oh, you drive all patience out of me!  Would you have one believe that

you haven't your proofs at hand, and yet are what you say you are?

You do not put your hand in your pocket now--for you have nothing there.

You make a claim like this, and then venture to travel without

credentials.  These are simply incredibilities.  Don't you see that,

yourself?"



He cast about in his mind for a defence of some kind or other--hesitated

a little, and then said, with difficulty and diffidence:



"I will tell you just the truth, foolish as it will seem to you--

to anybody, I suppose--but it is the truth.  I had an ideal--call it

a dream, a folly, if you will--but I wanted to renounce the privileges

and unfair advantages enjoyed by the nobility and wrung from the nation

by force and fraud, and purge myself of my share of those crimes against

right and reason, by thenceforth comrading with the poor and humble on

equal terms, earning with my own hands the bread I ate, and rising by my

own merit if I rose at all."



The young girl scanned his face narrowly while he spoke; and there was

something about his simplicity of manner and statement which touched her

--touched her almost to the danger point; but she set her grip on the

yielding spirit and choked it to quiescence; it could not be wise to

surrender to compassion or any kind of sentiment, yet; she must ask one

or two more questions.  Tracy was reading her face; and what he read

there lifted his drooping hopes a little.



"An earl's son to do that!  Why, he were a man!  A man to love!--oh,

more, a man to worship!"



"Why?"



"But he never lived!  He is not born, he will not be born.  The

self-abnegation that could do that--even in utter folly, and hopeless of

conveying benefit to any, beyond the mere example--could be mistaken for

greatness; why, it would be greatness in this cold age of sordid ideals!

A moment--wait--let me finish; I have one question more.  Your father is

earl of what?"



"Rossmore--and I am Viscount Berkeley!"



The fat was in the fire again.  The girl felt so outraged that it was

difficult for her to speak.



"How can you venture such a brazen thing!  You know that he is dead,

and you know that I know it.  Oh, to rob the living of name and honors

for a selfish and temporary advantage is crime enough, but to rob the

defenceless dead--why it is more than crime, it degrades crime!"



"Oh, listen to me--just a word--don't turn away like that.  Don't go--

don't leave me, so--stay one moment.  On my honor--"



"Oh, on your honor!"



"On my honor I am what I say!  And I will prove it, and you will believe,

I know you will.  I will bring you a message--a cablegram--"



"When?"



"To-morrow--next day--"



"Signed 'Rossmore'?"



"Yes--signed Rossmore."



"What will that prove?"



"What will it prove?  What should it prove?"



"If you force me to say it--possibly the presence of a confederate

somewhere."



This was a hard blow, and staggered him.  He said, dejectedly:



"It is true.  I did not think of it.  Oh, my God, I do not know any way

to do; I do everything wrong.  You are going?--and you won't say even

good-night--or good-bye?  Ah, we have not parted like this before."



"Oh, I want to run and--no, go, now."  A pause--then she said, "You may

bring the message when it comes."



"Oh, may I?  God bless you."



He was gone; and none too soon; her lips were already quivering, and now

she broke down.  Through her sobbings her words broke from time to time.



"Oh, he is gone.  I have lost him, I shall never see him any more.  And

he didn't kiss me good-bye; never even offered to force a kiss from me,

and he knowing it was the very, very last, and I expecting he would, and

never dreaming he would treat me so after all we have been to each other.

Oh, oh, oh, oh, what shall I do, what shall I do!  He is a dear, poor,

miserable, good-hearted, transparent liar and humbug, but oh, I do love

him so--!"  After a little she broke into speech again.  "How dear he is!

and I shall miss him so, I shall miss him so!  Why won't he ever think to

forge a message and fetch it?--but no, he never will, he never thinks of

anything; he's so honest and simple it wouldn't ever occur to him.

Oh, what did possess him to think he could succeed as a fraud--and he

hasn't the first requisite except duplicity that I can see.  Oh, dear,

I'll go to bed and give it all up.  Oh, I wish I had told him to come and

tell me whenever he didn't get any telegram--and now it's all my own

fault if I never see him again.  How my eyes must look!"









CHAPTER XXIV.



Next day, sure enough, the cablegram didn't come.  This was an immense

disaster; for Tracy couldn't go into the presence without that ticket,

although it wasn't going to possess any value as evidence.  But if the

failure of the cablegram on that first day may be called an immense

disaster, where is the dictionary that can turn out a phrase sizeable

enough to describe the tenth day's failure?  Of course every day that the

cablegram didn't come made Tracy all of twenty-four hours' more ashamed

of himself than he was the day before, and made Sally fully twenty-four

hours more certain than ever that he not only hadn't any father anywhere,

but hadn't even a confederate--and so it followed that he was a

double-dyed humbug and couldn't be otherwise.



These were hard days for Barrow and the art firm.  All these had their

hands full, trying to comfort Tracy.  Barrow's task was particularly

hard, because he was made a confidant in full, and therefore had to humor

Tracy's delusion that he had a father, and that the father was an earl,

and that he was going to send a cablegram.  Barrow early gave up the idea

of trying to convince Tracy that he hadn't any father, because this had

such a bad effect on the patient, and worked up his temper to such an

alarming degree.  He had tried, as an experiment, letting Tracy think he

had a father; the result was so good that he went further, with proper

caution, and tried letting him think his father was an earl; this wrought

so well, that he grew bold, and tried letting him think he had two

fathers, if he wanted to, but he didn't want to, so Barrow withdrew one

of them and substituted letting him think he was going to get a

cablegram--which Barrow judged he wouldn't, and was right; but Barrow

worked the cablegram daily for all it was worth, and it was the one thing

that kept Tracy alive; that was Barrow's opinion.



And these were bitter hard days for poor Sally, and mainly delivered up

to private crying.  She kept her furniture pretty damp, and so caught

cold, and the dampness and the cold and the sorrow together undermined

her appetite, and she was a pitiful enough object, poor thing.  Her state

was bad enough, as per statement of it above quoted; but all the forces

of nature and circumstance seemed conspiring to make it worse--and

succeeding.  For instance, the morning after her dismissal of Tracy,

Hawkins and Sellers read in the associated press dispatches that a toy

puzzle called Pigs in the Clover, had come into sudden favor within the

past few weeks, and that from the Atlantic to the Pacific all the

populations of all the States had knocked off work to play with it,

and that the business of the country had now come to a standstill by

consequence; that judges, lawyers, burglars, parsons, thieves, merchants,

mechanics, murderers, women, children, babies--everybody, indeed, could

be seen from morning till midnight, absorbed in one deep project and

purpose, and only one--to pen those pigs, work out that puzzle

successfully; that all gayety, all cheerfulness had departed from the

nation, and in its place care, preoccupation and anxiety sat upon every

countenance, and all faces were drawn, distressed, and furrowed with the

signs of age and trouble, and marked with the still sadder signs of

mental decay and incipient madness; that factories were at work night and

day in eight cities, and yet to supply the demand for the puzzle was thus

far impossible.  Hawkins was wild with joy, but Sellers was calm.  Small

matters could not disturb his serenity.  He said--



"That's just the way things go.  A man invents a thing which could

revolutionize the arts, produce mountains of money, and bless the earth,

and who will bother with it or show any interest in it?--and so you are

just as poor as you were before.  But you invent some worthless thing to

amuse yourself with, and would throw it away if let alone, and all of a

sudden the whole world makes a snatch for it and out crops a fortune.

Hunt up that Yankee and collect, Hawkins--half is yours, you know.

Leave me to potter at my lecture."



This was a temperance lecture.  Sellers was head chief in the Temperance

camp, and had lectured, now and then in that interest, but had been

dissatisfied with his efforts; wherefore he was now about to try a new

plan.  After much thought he had concluded that a main reason why his

lectures lacked fire or something, was, that they were too transparently

amateurish; that is to say, it was probably too plainly perceptible that

the lecturer was trying to tell people about the horrid effects of liquor

when he didn't really know anything about those effects except from

hearsay, since he had hardly ever tasted an intoxicant in his life.

His scheme, now, was to prepare himself to speak from bitter experience.

Hawkins was to stand by with the bottle, calculate the doses, watch the

effects, make notes of results, and otherwise assist in the preparation.

Time was short, for the ladies would be along about noon--that is to say,

the temperance organization called the Daughters of Siloam--and Sellers

must be ready to head the procession.



The time kept slipping along--Hawkins did not return--Sellers could not

venture to wait longer; so he attacked the bottle himself, and proceeded

to note the effects.  Hawkins got back at last; took one comprehensive

glance at the lecturer, and went down and headed off the procession.

The ladies were grieved to hear that the champion had been taken suddenly

ill and violently so, but glad to hear that it was hoped he would be out

again in a few days.



As it turned out, the old gentleman didn't turn over or show any signs of

life worth speaking of for twenty-four hours.  Then he asked after the

procession, and learned what had happened about it.  He was sorry; said

he had been "fixed" for it.  He remained abed several days, and his wife

and daughter took turns in sitting with him and ministering to his wants.

Often he patted Sally's head and tried to comfort her.



"Don't cry, my child, don't cry so; you know your old father did it by

mistake and didn't mean a bit of harm; you know he wouldn't intentionally

do anything to make you ashamed for the world; you know he was trying to

do good and only made the mistake through ignorance, not knowing the

right doses and Washington not there to help.  Don't cry so, dear, it

breaks my old heart to see you, and think I've brought this humiliation

on you and you so dear to me and so good.  I won't ever do it again,

indeed I won't; now be comforted, honey, that's a good child."



But when she wasn't on duty at the bedside the crying went on just the

same; then the mother would try to comfort her, and say:



"Don't cry, dear, he never meant any harm; it was all one of those

happens that you can't guard against when you are trying experiments,

that way.  You see I don't cry.  It's because I know him so well.

I could never look anybody in the face again if he had got into such an

amazing condition as that a-purpose; but bless you his intention was

pure and high, and that makes the act pure, though it was higher than was

necessary.  We're not humiliated, dear, he did it under a noble impulse

and we don't need to be ashamed.  There, don't cry any more, honey."



Thus, the old gentleman was useful to Sally, during several days, as an

explanation of her tearfulness.  She felt thankful to him for the shelter

he was affording her, but often said to herself, "It's a shame to let him

see in my cryings a reproach--as if he could ever do anything that could

make me reproach him!  But I can't confess; I've got to go on using him

for a pretext, he's the only one I've got in the world, and I do need one

so much."



As soon as Sellers was out again, and found that stacks of money had been

placed in bank for him and Hawkins by the Yankee, he said, "Now we'll

soon see who's the Claimant and who's the Authentic.  I'll just go over

there and warm up that House of Lords."  During the next few days he and

his wife were so busy with preparations for the voyage that Sally had all

the privacy she needed, and all the chance to cry that was good for her.

Then the old pair left for New York--and England.



Sally had also had a chance to do another thing.  That was, to make up

her mind that life was not worth living upon the present terms.  If she

must give up her impostor and die; doubtless she must submit; but might

she not lay her whole case before some disinterested person, first, and

see if there wasn't perhaps some saving way out of the matter?  She

turned this idea over in her mind a good deal.  In her first visit with

Hawkins after her parents were gone, the talk fell upon Tracy, and she

was impelled to set her case before the statesman and take his counsel.

So she poured out her heart, and he listened with painful solicitude.

She concluded, pleadingly, with--



"Don't tell me he is an impostor.  I suppose he is, but doesn't it look

to you as if he isn't?  You are cool, you know, and outside; and so,

maybe it can look to you as if he isn't one, when it can't to me.

Doesn't it look to you as if he isn't?  Couldn't you--can't it look to

you that way--for--for my sake?"



The poor man was troubled, but he felt obliged to keep in the

neighborhood of the truth.  He fought around the present detail a little

while, then gave it up and said he couldn't really see his way to

clearing Tracy.



"No," he said, "the truth is, he's an impostor."



"That is, you--you feel a little certain, but not entirely--oh, not

entirely, Mr. Hawkins!"



"It's a pity to have to say it--I do hate to say it, but I don't think

anything about it, I know he's an impostor."



"Oh, now, Mr.  Hawkins, you can't go that far.  A body can't really know

it, you know.  It isn't proved that he's not what he says he is."



Should he come out and make a clean breast of the whole wretched

business?  Yes--at least the most of it--it ought to be done.  So he set

his teeth and went at the matter with determination, but purposing to

spare the girl one pain--that of knowing that Tracy was a criminal.



"Now I am going to tell you a plain tale; one not pleasant for me to tell

or for you to hear, but we've got to stand it.  I know all about that

fellow; and I know he is no earl's son."



The girl's eyes flashed, and she said:



"I don't care a snap for that--go on!"



This was so wholly unexpected that it at once obstructed the narrative;

Hawkins was not even sure that he had heard aright.  He said:



"I don't know that I quite understand.  Do you mean to say that if he was

all right and proper otherwise you'd be indifferent about the earl part

of the business?"



"Absolutely."



"You'd be entirely satisfied with him and wouldn't care for his not being

an earl's son,--that being an earl's son wouldn't add any value to him?"



"Not the least value that I would care for.  Why, Mr.  Hawkins, I've

gotten over all that day-dreaming about earldoms and aristocracies and

all such nonsense and am become just a plain ordinary nobody and content

with it; and it is to him I owe my cure.  And as to anything being able

to add a value to him, nothing can do that.  He is the whole world to me,

just as he is; he comprehends all the values there are--then how can you

add one?"



"She's pretty far gone."  He said that to himself.  He continued, still

to himself, "I must change my plan again; I can't seem to strike one that

will stand the requirements of this most variegated emergency five

minutes on a stretch.  Without making this fellow a criminal, I believe

I will invent a name and a character for him calculated to disenchant

her.  If it fails to do it, then I'll know that the next rightest thing

to do will be to help her to her fate, poor thing, not hinder her."

Then he said aloud:



"Well, Gwendolen--"



"I want to be called Sally."



"I'm glad of it; I like it better, myself.  Well, then, I'll tell you

about this man Snodgrass."



"Snodgrass!  Is that his name?"



"Yes--Snodgrass.  The other's his nom de plume."



"It's hideous!"



"I know it is, but we can't help our names."



"And that is truly his real name--and not Howard Tracy?"



Hawkins answered, regretfully:



"Yes, it seems a pity."



The girl sampled the name musingly, once or twice--



"Snodgrass.  Snodgrass.  No, I could not endure that.  I could not get

used to it.  No, I should call him by his first name.  What is his first

name?"



"His--er--his initials are S. M."



"His initials?  I don't care anything about his initials.  I can't call

him by his initials.  What do they stand for?"



"Well, you see, his father was a physician, and he--he--well he was an

idolater of his profession, and he--well, he was a very eccentric man,

and--"



"What do they stand for!  What are you shuffling about?"



"They--well they stand for Spinal Meningitis.  His father being a phy--"



"I never heard such an infamous name!  Nobody can ever call a person

that--a person they love.  I wouldn't call an enemy by such a name.

It sounds like an epithet."  After a moment, she added with a kind of

consternation, "Why, it would be my name!  Letters would come with it

on."



"Yes--Mrs. Spinal Meningitis Snodgrass."



"Don't repeat it--don't; I can't bear it.  Was the father a lunatic?"



"No, that is not charged."



"I am glad of that, because that is transmissible.  What do you think was

the matter with him, then?"



"Well, I don't really know.  The family used to run a good deal to

idiots, and so, maybe--"



"Oh, there isn't any maybe about it.  This one was an idiot."



"Well, yes--he could have been.  He was suspected."



"Suspected!" said Sally, with irritation.  "Would one suspect there was

going to be a dark time if he saw the constellations fall out of the sky?

But that is enough about the idiot, I don't take any interest in idiots;

tell me about the son."



Very well, then, this one was the eldest, but not the favorite.  His

brother, Zylobalsamum--"



"Wait--give me a chance to realize that.  It is perfectly stupefying.

Zylo--what did you call it?"



"Zylobalsamum."



"I never heard such a name: It sounds like a disease.  Is it a disease?"



"No, I don't think it's a disease.  It's either Scriptural or--"



"Well, it's not Scriptural."



"Then it's anatomical.  I knew it was one or the other.  Yes, I remember,

now, it is anatomical.  It's a ganglion--a nerve centre--it is what is

called the zylobalsamum process."



"Well, go on; and if you come to any more of them, omit the names; they

make one feel so uncomfortable."



"Very well, then.  As I said, this one was not a favorite in the family,

and so he was neglected in every way, never sent to school, always

allowed to associate with the worst and coarsest characters, and so of

course he has grown up a rude, vulgar, ignorant, dissipated ruffian,

and--"



"He?  It's no such thing!  You ought to be more generous than to make

such a statement as that about a poor young stranger who--who--why, he is

the very opposite of that!  He is considerate, courteous, obliging,

modest, gentle, refined, cultivated-oh, for shame!  how can you say such

things about him?"



"I don't blame you, Sally--indeed I haven't a word of blame for you for

being blinded by--your affection--blinded to these minor defects which

are so manifest to others who--"



"Minor defects?  Do you call these minor defects?  What are murder and

arson, pray?"



"It is a difficult question to answer straight off--and of course

estimates of such things vary with environment.  With us, out our way,

they would not necessarily attract as much attention as with you, yet

they are often regarded with disapproval--"



"Murder and arson are regarded with disapproval?"



"Oh, frequently."



"With disapproval.  Who are those Puritans you are talking about?

But wait--how did you come to know so much about this family?  Where did

you get all this hearsay evidence?"



"Sally, it isn't hearsay evidence.  That is the serious part of it.

I knew that family--personally."



This was a surprise.



"You?  You actually knew them?"



"Knew Zylo, as we used to call him, and knew his father, Dr. Snodgrass.

I didn't know your own Snodgrass, but have had glimpses of him from time

to time, and I heard about him all the time.  He was the common talk, you

see, on account of his--"



"On account of his not being a house-burner or an assassin, I suppose.

That would have made him commonplace.  Where did you know these people?"



"In Cherokee Strip."



"Oh, how preposterous!  There are not enough people in Cherokee Strip to

give anybody a reputation, good or bad.  There isn't a quorum.  Why the

whole population consists of a couple of wagon loads of horse thieves."



Hawkins answered placidly--



"Our friend was one of those wagon loads."



Sally's eyes burned and her breath came quick and fast, but she kept a

fairly good grip on her anger and did not let it get the advantage of her

tongue.  The statesman sat still and waited for developments.  He was

content with his work.  It was as handsome a piece of diplomatic art as

he had ever turned out, he thought; and now, let the girl make her own

choice.  He judged she would let her spectre go; he hadn't a doubt of it

in fact; but anyway, let the choice be made, and he was ready to ratify

it and offer no further hindrance.



Meantime Sally had thought her case out and made up her mind.  To the

major's disappointment the verdict was against him.  Sally said:



"He has no friend but me, and I will not desert him now.  I will not

marry him if his moral character is bad; but if he can prove that it

isn't, I will--and he shall have the chance.  To me he seems utterly good

and dear; I've never seen anything about him that looked otherwise--

except, of course, his calling himself an earl's son.  Maybe that is only

vanity, and no real harm, when you get to the bottom of it.  I do not

believe he is any such person as you have painted him.  I want to see

him.  I want you to find him and send him to me.  I will implore him to

be honest with me, and tell me the whole truth, and not be afraid."



"Very well; if that is your decision I will do it.  But Sally, you know,

he's poor, and--"



"Oh, I don't care anything about that.  That's neither here nor there.

Will you bring him to me?"



"I'll do it.  When?--"



"Oh, dear, it's getting toward dark, now, and so you'll have to put it

off till morning.  But you will find him in the morning, won't you?

Promise."



"I'll have him here by daylight."



"Oh, now you're your own old self again--and lovelier than ever!"



"I couldn't ask fairer than that.  Good-bye, dear."



Sally mused a moment alone, then said earnestly, "I love him in spite of

his name!" and went about her affairs with a light heart.









CHAPTER XXV.



Hawkins went straight to the telegraph office and disburdened his

conscience.  He said to himself, "She's not going to give this galvanized

cadaver up, that's plain.  Wild horses can't pull her away from him.

I've done my share; it's for Sellers to take an innings, now."  So he

sent this message to New York:



"Come back.  Hire special train.  She's going to marry the materializee."



Meantime a note came to Rossmore Towers to say that the Earl of Rossmore

had just arrived from England, and would do himself the pleasure of

calling in the evening.  Sally said to herself, "It is a pity he didn't

stop in New York; but it's no matter; he can go up to-morrow and see my

father.  He has come over here to tomahawk papa, very likely--or buy out

his claim.  This thing would have excited me, a while back; but it has

only one interest for me now, and only one value.  I can say to--to--

Spine, Spiny, Spinal--I don't like any form of that name!--I can say to

him to-morrow, 'Don't try to keep it up any more, or I shall have to tell

you whom I have been talking with last night, and then you will be

embarrassed.'"



Tracy couldn't know he was to be invited for the morrow, or he might have

waited.  As it was, he was too miserable to wait any longer; for his last

hope--a letter--had failed him.  It was fully due to-day; it had not

come.  Had his father really flung him away?  It looked so.  It was not

like his father, but it surely looked so.  His father was a rather tough

nut, in truth, but had never been so with his son--still, this implacable

silence had a calamitous look.  Anyway, Tracy would go to the Towers and

--then what?  He didn't know; his head was tired out with thinking--

he wouldn't think about what he must do or say--let it all take care of

itself.  So that he saw Sally once more, he would be satisfied, happen

what might; he wouldn't care.



He hardly knew how he got to the Towers, or when.  He knew and cared for

only one thing--he was alone with Sally.  She was kind, she was gentle,

there was moisture in her eyes, and a yearning something in her face and

manner which she could not wholly hide--but she kept her distance.  They

talked.  Bye and bye she said--watching his downcast countenance out of

the corner of her eye--



"It's so lonesome--with papa and mamma gone.  I try to read, but I can't

seem to get interested in any book.  I try the newspapers, but they do

put such rubbish in them.  You take up a paper and start to read

something you thinks interesting, and it goes on and on and on about how

somebody--well, Dr. Snodgrass, for instance--"



Not a movement from Tracy, not the quiver of a muscle.  Sally was amazed

--what command of himself he must have!  Being disconcerted, she paused

so long that Tracy presently looked up wearily and said:



"Well?"



"Oh, I thought you were not listening.  Yes, it goes on and on about this

Doctor Snodgrass, till you are so tired, and then about his younger son--

the favorite son--Zylobalsamum Snodgrass--"



Not a sign from Tracy, whose head was drooping again.  What supernatural

self-possession!  Sally fixed her eye on him and began again, resolved to

blast him out of his serenity this time if she knew how to apply the

dynamite that is concealed in certain forms of words when those words are

properly loaded with unexpected meanings.



"And next it goes on and on and on about the eldest son--not the

favorite, this one--and how he is neglected in his poor barren boyhood,

and allowed to grow up unschooled, ignorant, coarse, vulgar, the comrade

of the community's scum, and become in his completed manhood a rude,

profane, dissipated ruffian--"



That head still drooped!  Sally rose, moved softly and solemnly a step or

two, and stood before Tracy--his head came slowly up, his meek eyes met

her intense ones--then she finished with deep impressiveness--



"--named Spinal Meningitis Snodgrass!"



Tracy merely exhibited signs of increased fatigue.  The girl was outraged

by this iron indifference and callousness, and cried out--



"What are you made of?"



"I?  Why?"



"Haven't you any sensitiveness?  Don't these things touch any poor

remnant of delicate feeling in you?"



"N--no," he said wonderingly, "they don't seem to.  Why should they?"



"O, dear me, how can you look so innocent, and foolish, and good, and

empty, and gentle, and all that, right in the hearing of such things as

those!  Look me in the eye--straight in the eye.  There, now then, answer

me without a flinch.  Isn't Doctor Snodgrass your father, and isn't

Zylobalsamum your brother," [here Hawkins was about to enter the room,

but changed his mind upon hearing these words, and elected for a walk

down town, and so glided swiftly away], "and isn't your name Spinal

Meningitis, and isn't your father a doctor and an idiot, like all the

family for generations, and doesn't he name all his children after

poisons and pestilences and abnormal anatomical eccentricities of the

human body?  Answer me, some way or somehow--and quick.  Why do you sit

there looking like an envelope without any address on it and see me going

mad before your face with suspense!"



"Oh, I wish I could do--do--I wish I could do something, anything that

would give you peace again and make you happy; but I know of nothing--

I know of no way.  I have never heard of these awful people before."



"What?  Say it again!"



"I have never--never in my life till now."



"Oh, you do look so honest when you say that!  It must be true--surely

you couldn't look that way, you wouldn't look that way if it were not

true--would you?"



"I couldn't and wouldn't.  It is true.  Oh, let us end this suffering--

take me back into your heart and confidence--"



"Wait--one more thing.  Tell me you told that falsehood out of mere

vanity and are sorry for it; that you're not expecting to ever wear the

coronet of an earl--"



"Truly I am cured--cured this very day--I am not expecting it!"



"O, now you are mine!  I've got you back in the beauty and glory of your

unsmirched poverty and your honorable obscurity, and nobody shall ever

take you from me again but the grave!  And if--"



"De earl of Rossmore, fum Englan'!"



"My father!"  The young man released the girl and hung his head.



The old gentleman stood surveying the couple--the one with a strongly

complimentary right eye, the other with a mixed expression done with the

left.  This is difficult, and not often resorted to.  Presently his face

relaxed into a kind of constructive gentleness, and he said to his son:



"Don't you think you could embrace me, too?"



The young man did it with alacrity.  "Then you are the son of an earl,

after all," said Sally, reproachfully.



"Yes, I--"



"Then I won't have you!"



"O, but you know--"



"No, I will not.  You've told me another fib."



"She's right.  Go away and leave us.  I want to talk with her."



Berkeley was obliged to go.  But he did not go far.  He remained on the

premises.  At midnight the conference between the old gentleman and the

young girl was still going blithely on, but it presently drew to a close,

and the former said:



"I came all the way over here to inspect you, my dear, with the general

idea of breaking off this match if there were two fools of you, but as

there's only one, you can have him if you'll take him."



"Indeed I will, then!  May I kiss you?"



"You may.  Thank you.  Now you shall have that privilege whenever you are

good."



Meantime Hawkins had long ago returned and slipped up into the

laboratory.  He was rather disconcerted to find his late invention,

Snodgrass, there.  The news was told him that the English Rossmore was

come,



--"and I'm his son, Viscount Berkeley, not Howard Tracy any more."



Hawkins was aghast.  He said:



"Good gracious, then you're dead!"



"Dead?"



"Yes you are--we've got your ashes."



"Hang those ashes, I'm tired of them; I'll give them to my father."



Slowly and painfully the statesman worked the truth into his head that

this was really a flesh and blood young man, and not the insubstantial

resurrection he and Sellers had so long supposed him to be.  Then he said

with feeling--



"I'm so glad; so glad on Sally's account, poor thing.  We took you for a

departed materialized bank thief from Tahlequah.  This will be a heavy

blow to Sellers."  Then he explained the whole matter to Berkeley, who

said:



"Well, the Claimant must manage to stand the blow, severe as it is.

But he'll get over the disappointment."



"Who--the colonel?  He'll get over it the minute he invents a new miracle

to take its place.  And he's already at it by this time.  But look here--

what do you suppose became of the man you've been representing all this

time?"



"I don't know.  I saved his clothes--it was all I could do.  I am afraid

he lost his life."



"Well, you must have found twenty or thirty thousand dollars in those

clothes, in money or certificates of deposit."



"No, I found only five hundred and a trifle.  I borrowed the trifle and

banked the five hundred."



"What'll we do about it?"



"Return it to the owner."



"It's easy said, but not easy to manage.  Let's leave it alone till we

get Sellers's advice.  And that reminds me.  I've got to run and meet

Sellers and explain who you are not and who you are, or he'll come

thundering in here to stop his daughter from marrying a phantom.  But--

suppose your father came over here to break off the match?"



"Well, isn't he down stairs getting acquainted with Sally?  That's all

safe."



So Hawkins departed to meet and prepare the Sellerses.



Rossmore Towers saw great times and late hours during the succeeding

week.  The two earls were such opposites in nature that they fraternized

at once.  Sellers said privately that Rossmore was the most extraordinary

character he had ever met--a man just made out of the condensed milk of

human kindness, yet with the ability to totally hide the fact from any

but the most practised character-reader; a man whose whole being was

sweetness, patience and charity, yet with a cunning so profound, an

ability so marvelous in the acting of a double part, that many a person

of considerable intelligence might live with him for centuries and never

suspect the presence in him of these characteristics.





Finally there was a quiet wedding at the Towers, instead of a big one at

the British embassy, with the militia and the fire brigades and the

temperance organizations on hand in torchlight procession, as at first

proposed by one of the earls.  The art-firm and Barrow were present at

the wedding, and the tinner and Puss had been invited, but the tinner was

ill and Puss was nursing him--for they were engaged.



The Sellerses were to go to England with their new allies for a brief

visit, but when it was time to take the train from Washington,

the colonel was missing.



Hawkins was going as far as New York with the party, and said he would

explain the matter on the road.



The explanation was in a letter left by the colonel in Hawkins's hands.

In it he promised to join Mrs. Sellers later, in England, and then went

on to say:



The truth is, my dear Hawkins, a mighty idea has been born to me within

the hour, and I must not even stop to say goodbye to my dear ones.

A man's highest duty takes precedence of all minor ones, and must be

attended to with his best promptness and energy, at whatsoever cost to

his affections or his convenience.  And first of all a man's duties is

his duty to his own honor--he must keep that spotless.  Mine is

threatened.  When I was feeling sure of my imminent future solidity,

I forwarded to the Czar of Russia--perhaps prematurely--an offer for the

purchase of Siberia, naming a vast sum.  Since then an episode has warned

me that the method by which I was expecting to acquire this money--

materialization upon a scale of limitless magnitude--is marred by a taint

of temporary uncertainty.  His imperial majesty may accept my offer at

any moment.  If this should occur now, I should find myself painfully

embarrassed, in fact financially inadequate.  I could not take Siberia.

This would become known, and my credit would suffer.



Recently my private hours have been dark indeed, but the sun shines main,

now; I see my way; I shall be able to meet my obligation, and without

having to ask an extension of the stipulated time, I think.  This grand

new idea of mine--the sublimest I have ever conceived, will save me

whole, I am sure.  I am leaving for San Francisco this moment, to test

it, by the help of the great Lick telescope.  Like all of my more notable

discoveries and inventions, it is based upon hard, practical scientific

laws; all other bases are unsound and hence untrustworthy.  In brief,

then, I have conceived the stupendous idea of reorganizing the climates

of the earth according to the desire of the populations interested.

That is to say, I will furnish climates to order, for cash or negotiable

paper, taking the old climates in part payment, of course, at a fair

discount, where they are in condition to be repaired at small cost and

let out for hire to poor and remote communities not able to afford a good

climate and not caring for an expensive one for mere display.  My studies

have convinced me that the regulation of climates and the breeding of new

varieties at will from the old stock is a feasible thing.  Indeed I am

convinced that it has been done before; done in prehistoric times by now

forgotten and unrecorded civilizations.  Everywhere I find hoary

evidences of artificial manipulation of climates in bygone times.  Take

the glacial period.  Was that produced by accident?  Not at all; it was

done for money.  I have a thousand proofs of it, and will some day reveal

them.



I will confide to you an outline of my idea.  It is to utilize the spots

on the sun--get control of them, you understand, and apply the stupendous

energies which they wield to beneficent purposes in the reorganizing of

our climates.  At present they merely make trouble and do harm in the

evoking of cyclones and other kinds of electric storms; but once under

humane and intelligent control this will cease and they will become a

boon to man.



I have my plan all mapped out, whereby I hope and expect to acquire

complete and perfect control of the sun-spots, also details of the method

whereby I shall employ the same commercially; but I will not venture to

go into particulars before the patents shall have been issued.  I shall

hope and expect to sell shop-rights to the minor countries at a

reasonable figure and supply a good business article of climate to the

great empires at special rates, together with fancy brands for

coronations, battles and other great and particular occasions.  There are

billions of money in this enterprise, no expensive plant is required, and

I shall begin to realize in a few days--in a few weeks at furthest.

I shall stand ready to pay cash for Siberia the moment it is delivered,

and thus save my honor and my credit.  I am confident of this.



I would like you to provide a proper outfit and start north as soon as I

telegraph you, be it night or be it day.  I wish you to take up all the

country stretching away from the north pole on all sides for many degrees

south, and buy Greenland and Iceland at the best figure you can get now

while they are cheap.  It is my intention to move one of the tropics up

there and transfer the frigid zone to the equator.  I will have the

entire Arctic Circle in the market as a summer resort next year, and will

use the surplusage of the old climate, over and above what can be

utilized on the equator, to reduce the temperature of opposition resorts.

But I have said enough to give you an idea of the prodigious nature of my

scheme and the feasible and enormously profitable character of it.

I shall join all you happy people in England as soon as I shall have sold

out some of my principal climates and arranged with the Czar about

Siberia.



Meantime, watch for a sign from me.  Eight days from now, we shall be

wide asunder; for I shall be on the border of the Pacific, and you far

out on the Atlantic, approaching England.  That day, if I am alive and my

sublime discovery is proved and established, I will send you greeting,

and my messenger shall deliver it where you are, in the solitudes of the

sea; for I will waft a vast sun-spot across the disk like drifting smoke,

and you will know it for my love-sign, and will say "Mulberry Sellers

throws us a kiss across the universe."













APPENDIX.



WEATHER FOR USE IN THIS BOOK.



Selected from the Best Authorities.



A brief though violent thunderstorm which had raged over the city was

passing away; but still, though the rain had ceased more than an hour

before, wild piles of dark and coppery clouds, in which a fierce and

rayless glow was laboring, gigantically overhung the grotesque and

huddled vista of dwarf houses, while in the distance, sheeting high over

the low, misty confusion of gables and chimneys, spread a pall of dead,

leprous blue, suffused with blotches of dull, glistening yellow, and with

black plague-spots of vapor floating and faint lightnings crinkling on

its surface.  Thunder, still muttering in the close and sultry air, kept

the scared dwellers in the street within, behind their closed shutters;

and all deserted, cowed, dejected, squalid, like poor, stupid, top-heavy

things that had felt the wrath of the summer tempest, stood the drenched

structures on either side of the narrow and crooked way, ghastly and

picturesque, under the giant canopy.  Rain dripped wretchedly in slow

drops of melancholy sound from their projecting eaves upon the broken

flagging, lay there in pools or trickled into the swollen drains, where

the fallen torrent sullenly gurgled on its way to the river.

                              "The Brazen Android."-W.  D.  O'Connor.





          The fiery mid-March sun a moment hung

          Above the bleak Judean wilderness;

          Then darkness swept upon us, and 't was night.

                    "Easter-Eve at Kerak-Moab."--Clinton Scollard.





The quick-coming winter twilight was already at hand.  Snow was again

falling, sifting delicately down, incidentally as it were.

                    "Felicia."  Fanny N. D. Murfree.





Merciful heavens!  The whole west, from right to left, blazes up with a

fierce light, and next instant the earth reels and quivers with the awful

shock of ten thousand batteries of artillery.  It is the signal for the

Fury to spring--for a thousand demons to scream and shriek--for

innumerable serpents of fire to writhe and light up the blackness.



Now the rain falls--now the wind is let loose with a terrible shriek--now

the lightning is so constant that the eyes burn, and the thunder-claps

merge into an awful roar, as did the 800 cannon at Gettysburg.  Crash!

Crash!  Crash!  It is the cottonwood trees falling to earth.  Shriek!

Shriek!  Shriek!  It is the Demon racing along the plain and uprooting

even the blades of grass.  Shock!  Shock!  Shock!  It is the Fury

flinging his fiery bolts into the bosom of the earth.--

                    "The Demon and the Fury."  M. Quad.





Away up the gorge all diurnal fancies trooped into the wide liberties of

endless luminous vistas of azure sunlit mountains beneath the shining

azure heavens.  The sky, looking down in deep blue placidities, only here

and there smote the water to azure emulations of its tint.--

                    "In the Stranger's Country." Charles Egbert Craddock.





There was every indication of a dust-storm, though the sun still shone

brilliantly.  The hot wind had become wild and rampant.  It was whipping

up the sandy coating of the plain in every direction.  High in the air

were seen whirling spires and cones of sand--a curious effect against the

deep-blue sky.  Below, puffs of sand were breaking out of the plain in

every direction, as though the plain were alive with invisible horsemen.

These sandy cloudlets were instantly dissipated by the wind; it was the

larger clouds that were lifted whole into the air, and the larger clouds

of sand were becoming more and more the rule.



Alfred's eye, quickly scanning the horizon, descried the roof of the

boundary-rider's hut still gleaming in the sunlight.  He remembered the

hut well.  It could not be farther than four miles, if as much as that,

from this point of the track.  He also knew these dust-storms of old;

Bindarra was notorious for them: Without thinking twice, Alfred put

spurs to his horse and headed for the hut.  Before he had ridden half the

distance the detached clouds of sand banded together in one dense

whirlwind, and it was only owing to his horse's instinct that he did not

ride wide of the hut altogether; for during the last half-mile he never

saw the hut, until its outline loomed suddenly over his horse's ears; and

by then the sun was invisible.--

                    "A Bride from the Bush."





It rained forty days and forty nights.--Genesis.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Claimant

by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













EXTRACTS FROM ADAM'S DIARY



Translated from the original MS.



by Mark Twain







[NOTE.--I translated a portion of this diary some years ago, and

a friend of mine printed a few copies in an incomplete form, but

the public never got them.  Since then I have deciphered some more

of Adam's hieroglyphics, and think he has now become sufficiently

important as a public character to justify this publication.--M. T.]









Monday



This new creature with the long hair is a good deal in the way.

It is always hanging around and following me about.  I don't like

this; I am not used to company.  I wish it would stay with the

other animals.  Cloudy to-day, wind in the east; think we shall

have rain....  Where did I get that word?...  I remember now

--the new creature uses it.



Tuesday



Been examining the great waterfall.  It is the finest thing on the

estate, I think.  The new creature calls it Niagara Falls--why,

I am sure I do not know.  Says it looks like Niagara Falls.  That

is not a reason; it is mere waywardness and imbecility.  I get no

chance to name anything myself.  The new creature names everything

that comes along, before I can get in a protest.  And always that

same pretext is offered--it looks like the thing.  There is the

dodo, for instance.  Says the moment one looks at it one sees at

a glance that it "looks like a dodo."  It will have to keep that

name, no doubt.  It wearies me to fret about it, and it does no

good, anyway.  Dodo! It looks no more like a dodo than I do.



Wednesday



Built me a shelter against the rain, but could not have it to

myself in peace.  The new creature intruded.  When I tried to put

it out it shed water out of the holes it looks with, and wiped it

away with the back of its paws, and made a noise such as some of

the other animals make when they are in distress.  I wish it would

not talk; it is always talking.  That sounds like a cheap fling

at the poor creature, a slur; but I do not mean it so.  I have never

heard the human voice before, and any new and strange sound

intruding itself here upon the solemn hush of these dreaming

solitudes offends my ear and seems a false note.  And this new

sound is so close to me; it is right at my shoulder, right at my

ear, first on one side and then on the other, and I am used only

to sounds that are more or less distant from me.



Friday



The naming goes recklessly on, in spite of anything I can do.  I

had a very good name for the estate, and it was musical and pretty

--GARDEN-OF-EDEN.  Privately, I continue to call it that, but not

any longer publicly.  The new creature says it is all woods and

rocks and scenery, and therefore has no resemblance to a garden.

Says it looks like a park, and does not look like anything but a

park.  Consequently, without consulting me, it has been new-named

--NIAGARA FALLS PARK.  This is sufficiently high-handed, it seems to

me.  And already there is a sign up:



                         KEEP OFF

                         THE GRASS



My life is not as happy as it was.



Saturday



The new creature eats too much fruit.  We are going to run short,

most likely.  "We" again--that is its word; mine too, now, from

hearing it so much.  Good deal of fog this morning.  I do not go

out in the fog myself.  The new creature does.  It goes out in

all weathers, and stumps right in with its muddy feet.  And talks.

It used to be so pleasant and quiet here.



Sunday



Pulled through.  This day is getting to be more and more trying.

It was selected and set apart last November as a day of rest.  I

already had six of them per week, before.  This morning found the

new creature trying to clod apples out of that forbidden tree.



Monday



The new creature says its name is Eve.  That is all right, I have

no objections.  Says it is to call it by when I want it to come.

I said it was superfluous, then.  The word evidently raised me in

its respect; and indeed it is a large, good word, and will bear

repetition.  It says it is not an It, it is a She.  This is probably

doubtful; yet it is all one to me; what she is were nothing to me

if she would but go by herself and not talk.



Tuesday



She has littered the whole estate with execrable names and offensive

signs:



THIS WAY TO THE WHIRLPOOL.



THIS WAY TO GOAT ISLAND.



CAVE OF THE WINDS THIS WAY.



She says this park would make a tidy summer resort, if there was

any custom for it.  Summer resort--another invention of hers--just

words, without any meaning.  What is a summer resort? But it is

best not to ask her, she has such a rage for explaining.



Friday



She has taken to beseeching me to stop going over the Falls.  What

harm does it do? Says it makes her shudder.  I wonder why.  I have

always done it--always liked the plunge, and the excitement, and

the coolness.  I supposed it was what the Falls were for.  They

have no other use that I can see, and they must have been made for

something.  She says they were only made for scenery--like the

rhinoceros and the mastodon.



I went over the Falls in a barrel--not satisfactory to her.  Went

over in a tub--still not satisfactory.  Swam the Whirlpool and the

Rapids in a fig-leaf suit.  It got much damaged.  Hence, tedious

complaints about my extravagance.  I am too much hampered here.

What I need is change of scene.



Saturday



I escaped last Tuesday night, and travelled two days, and built

me another shelter, in a secluded place, and obliterated my tracks

as well as I could, but she hunted me out by means of a beast which

she has tamed and calls a wolf, and came making that pitiful noise

again, and shedding that water out of the places she looks with.

I was obliged to return with her, but will presently emigrate again,

when occasion offers.  She engages herself in many foolish things:

among others, trying to study out why the animals called lions and

tigers live on grass and flowers, when, as she says, the sort of

teeth they wear would indicate that they were intended to eat each

other.  This is foolish, because to do that would be to kill each

other, and that would introduce what, as I understand it, is called

"death;" and death, as I have been told, has not yet entered the

Park.  Which is a pity, on some accounts.



Sunday



Pulled through.



Monday



I believe I see what the week is for: it is to give time to rest

up from the weariness of Sunday.  It seems a good idea....  She

has been climbing that tree again.  Clodded her out of it.  She

said nobody was looking.  Seems to consider that a sufficient

justification for chancing any dangerous thing.  Told her that.

The word justification moved her admiration--and envy too, I

thought.  It is a good word.



Thursday



She told me she was made out of a rib taken from my body.  This

is at least doubtful, if not more than that.  I have not missed

any rib....  She is in much trouble about the buzzard; says

grass does not agree with it; is afraid she can't raise it; thinks

it was intended to live on decayed flesh.  The buzzard must get

along the best it can with what is provided.  We cannot overturn

the whole scheme to accommodate the buzzard.



Saturday



She fell in the pond yesterday, when she was looking at herself

in it, which she is always doing.  She nearly strangled, and said

it was most uncomfortable.  This made her sorry for the creatures

which live in there, which she calls fish, for she continues to

fasten names on to things that don't need them and don't come when

they are called by them, which is a matter of no consequence to

her, as she is such a numskull anyway; so she got a lot of them

out and brought them in last night and put them in my bed to keep

warm, but I have noticed them now and then all day, and I don't

see that they are any happier there than they were before, only

quieter.  When night comes I shall throw them out-doors.  I will

not sleep with them again, for I find them clammy and unpleasant

to lie among when a person hasn't anything on.



Sunday



Pulled through.



Tuesday



She has taken up with a snake now.  The other animals are glad,

for she was always experimenting with them and bothering them;

and I am glad, because the snake talks, and this enables me to

get a rest.



Friday



She says the snake advises her to try the fruit of that tree, and

says the result will be a great and fine and noble education.  I

told her there would be another result, too--it would introduce

death into the world.  That was a mistake--it had been better to

keep the remark to myself; it only gave her an idea--she could

save the sick buzzard, and furnish fresh meat to the despondent

lions and tigers.  I advised her to keep away from the tree.  She

said she wouldn't.  I foresee trouble.  Will emigrate.



Wednesday



I have had a variegated time.  I escaped that night, and rode a

horse all night as fast as he could go, hoping to get clear out of

the Park and hide in some other country before the trouble should

begin; but it was not to be.  About an hour after sunup, as I was

riding through a flowery plain where thousands of animals were

grazing, slumbering, or playing with each other, according to their

wont, all of a sudden they broke into a tempest of frightful noises,

and in one moment the plain was in a frantic commotion and every

beast was destroying its neighbor.  I knew what it meant--Eve had

eaten that fruit, and death was come into the world....  The

tigers ate my horse, paying no attention when I ordered them to

desist,  and they would even have eaten me if I had stayed--which

I didn't, but went away in much haste....  I found this place,

outside the Park, and was fairly comfortable for a few days, but

she has found me out.  Found me out, and has named the place

Tonawanda--says it looks like that.  In fact, I was not sorry she

came, for there are but meagre pickings here, and she brought some

of those apples.  I was obliged to eat them, I was so hungry.  It

was against my principles, but I find that principles have no real

force except when one is well fed....  She came curtained in

boughs and bunches of leaves, and when I asked her what she meant

by such nonsense, and snatched them away and threw them down, she

tittered and blushed.  I had never seen a person titter and blush

before, and to me it seemed unbecoming and idiotic.  She said I

would soon know how it was myself.  This was correct.  Hungry as

I was, I laid down the apple half eaten--certainly the best one I

ever saw, considering the lateness of the season--and arrayed

myself in the discarded boughs and branches, and then spoke to her

with some severity and ordered her to go and get some more and not

make such a spectacle of herself.  She did it, and after this we

crept down to where the wild-beast battle had been, and collected

some skins, and I made her patch together a couple of suits proper

for public occasions.  They are uncomfortable, it is true, but

stylish, and that is the main point about clothes.  ...  I find

she is a good deal of a companion.  I see I should be lonesome and

depressed without her, now that I have lost my property.  Another

thing, she says it is ordered that we work for our living hereafter.

She will be useful.  I will superintend.



Ten Days Later



She accuses me of being the cause of our disaster! She says, with

apparent sincerity and truth, that the Serpent assured her that

the forbidden fruit was not apples, it was chestnuts.  I said I

was innocent, then, for I had not eaten any chestnuts.  She said

the Serpent informed her that "chestnut" was a figurative term

meaning an aged and mouldy joke.  I turned pale at that, for I

have made many jokes to pass the weary time, and some of them could

have been of that sort, though I had honestly supposed that they

were new when I made them.  She asked me if I had made one just

at the time of the catastrophe.  I was obliged to admit that I had

made one to myself, though not aloud.  It was this.  I was thinking

about the Falls, and I said to myself, "How wonderful it is to see

that vast body of water tumble down there!" Then in an instant a

bright thought flashed into my head, and I let it fly, saying, "It

would be a deal more wonderful to see it tumble up there!"--and I

was just about to kill myself with laughing at it when all nature

broke loose in war and death, and I had to flee for my life.

"There," she said, with triumph, "that is just it; the Serpent

mentioned that very jest, and called it the First Chestnut, and

said it was coeval with the creation."  Alas, I am indeed to blame.

Would that I were not witty; oh, would that I had never had that

radiant thought!



Next Year



We have named it Cain.  She caught it while I was up country

trapping on the North Shore of the Erie; caught it in the timber

a couple of miles from our dug-out--or it might have been four,

she isn't certain which.  It resembles us in some ways, and may

be a relation.  That is what she thinks, but this is an error,

in my judgment.  The difference in size warrants the conclusion

that it is a different and new kind of animal--a fish, perhaps,

though when I put it in the water to see, it sank, and she plunged

in and snatched it out before there was opportunity for the

experiment to determine the matter.  I still think it is a fish,

but she is indifferent about what it is, and will not let me have

it to try.  I do not understand this.  The coming of the creature

seems to have changed her whole nature and made her unreasonable

about experiments.  She thinks more of it than she does of any of

the other animals, but is not able to explain why.  Her mind is

disordered--everything shows it.  Sometimes she carries the fish

in her arms half the night when it complains and wants to get to

the water.  At such times the water comes out of the places in

her face that she looks out of, and she pats the fish on the back

and makes soft sounds with her mouth to soothe it, and betrays

sorrow and solicitude in a hundred ways.  I have never seen her

do like this with any other fish, and it troubles me greatly.  She

used to carry the young tigers around so, and play with them,

before we lost our property; but it was only play; she never took

on about them like this when their dinner disagreed with them.



Sunday



She doesn't work Sundays, but lies around all tired out, and likes

to have the fish wallow over her; and she makes fool noises to

amuse it, and pretends to chew its paws, and that makes it laugh.

I have not seen a fish before that could laugh.  This makes me

doubt....  I have come to like Sunday myself.  Superintending

all the week tires a body so.  There ought to be more Sundays.

In the old days they were tough, but now they come handy.



Wednesday



It isn't a fish.  I cannot quite make out what it is.  It makes

curious, devilish noises when not satisfied, and says "goo-goo"

when it is.  It is not one of us, for it doesn't walk; it is not

a bird, for it doesn't fly; it is not a frog, for it doesn't hop;

it is not a snake, for it doesn't crawl; I feel sure it is not a

fish, though I cannot get a chance to find out whether it can swim

or not.  It merely lies around, and mostly on its back, with its

feet up.  I have not seen any other animal do that before.  I said

I believed it was an enigma, but she only admired the word without

understanding it.  In my judgment it is either an enigma or some

kind of a bug.  If it dies, I will take it apart and see what its

arrangements are.  I never had a thing perplex me so.



Three Months Later



The perplexity augments instead of diminishing.  I sleep but little.

It has ceased from lying around, and goes about on its four legs

now.  Yet it differs from the other four-legged animals in that

its front legs are unusually short, consequently this causes the

main part of its person to stick up uncomfortably high in the air,

and this is not attractive.  It is built much as we are, but its

method of travelling shows that it is not of our breed.  The short

front legs and long hind ones indicate that it is of the kangaroo

family, but it is a marked variation of the species, since the

true kangaroo hops, whereas this one never does.  Still, it is a

curious and interesting variety, and has not been catalogued before.

As I discovered it, I have felt justified in securing the credit

of the discovery by attaching my name to it, and hence have called

it Kangaroorum Adamiensis....  It must have been a young one

when it came, for it has grown exceedingly since.  It must be five

times as big, now, as it was then, and when discontented is able

to make from twenty-two to thirty-eight times the noise it made

at first.  Coercion does not modify this, but has the contrary

effect.  For this reason I discontinued the system.  She reconciles

it by persuasion, and by giving it things which she had previously

told it she wouldn't give it.  As already observed, I was not at

home when it first came, and she told me she found it in the woods.

It seems odd that it should be the only one, yet it must be so,

for I have worn myself out these many weeks trying to find another

one to add to my collection, and for this one to play with; for

surely then it would be quieter, and we could tame it more easily.

But I find none, nor any vestige of any; and strangest of all, no

tracks.  It has to live on the ground, it cannot help itself;

therefore, how does it get about without leaving a track? I have

set a dozen traps, but they do no good.  I catch all small animals

except that one; animals that merely go into the trap out of

curiosity, I think, to see what the milk is there for.  They never

drink it.



Three Months Later



The kangaroo still continues to grow, which is very strange and

perplexing.  I never knew one to be so long getting its growth.

It has fur on its head now; not like kangaroo fur, but exactly

like our hair, except that it is much finer and softer, and instead

of being black is red.  I am like to lose my mind over the capricious

and harassing developments of this unclassifiable zoological freak.

If I could catch another one--but that is hopeless; it is a new

variety, and the only sample; this is plain.  But I caught a true

kangaroo and brought it in, thinking that this one, being lonesome,

would rather have that for company than have no kin at all, or any

animal it could feel a nearness to or get sympathy from in its

forlorn condition here among strangers who do not know its ways

or habits, or what to do to make it feel that it is among friends;

but it was a mistake--it went into such fits at the sight of the

kangaroo that I was convinced it had never seen one before.  I

pity the poor noisy little animal, but there is nothing I can do

to make it happy.  If I could tame it--but that is out of the

question; the more I try, the worse I seem to make it.  It grieves

me to the heart to see it in its little storms of sorrow and

passion.  I wanted to let it go, but she wouldn't hear of it.  That

seemed cruel and not like her; and yet she may be right.  It might

be lonelier than ever; for since I cannot find another one, how

could it?



Five Months Later



It is not a kangaroo.  No, for it supports itself by holding to

her finger, and thus goes a few steps on its hind legs, and then

falls down.  It is probably some kind of a bear; and yet it has

no tail--as yet--and no fur, except on its head.  It still keeps

on growing--that is a curious circumstance, for bears get their

growth earlier than this.  Bears are dangerous--since our

catastrophe--and I shall not be satisfied to have this one prowling

about the place much longer without a muzzle on.  I have offered

to get her a kangaroo if she would let this one go, but it did no

good--she is determined to run us into all sorts of foolish risks,

I think.  She was not like this before she lost her mind.



A Fortnight Later



I examined its mouth.  There is no danger yet; it has only one

tooth.  It has no tail yet.  It makes more noise now than it ever

did before--and mainly at night.  I have moved out.  But I shall

go over, mornings, to breakfast, and to see if it has more teeth.

If it gets a mouthful of teeth, it will be time for it to go, tail

or no tail, for a bear does not need a tail in order to be

dangerous.



Four Months Later



I have been off hunting and fishing a month, up in the region that

she calls Buffalo; I don't know why, unless it is because there

are not any buffaloes there.  Meantime the bear has learned to

paddle around all by itself on its hind legs, and says "poppa"

and "momma."  It is certainly a new species.  This resemblance to

words may be purely accidental, of course, and may have no purpose

or meaning; but even in that case it is still extraordinary, and

is a thing which no other bear can do.  This imitation of speech,

taken together with general absence of fur and entire absence of

tail, sufficiently indicates that this is a new kind of bear.  The

further study of it will be exceedingly interesting.  Meantime I

will go off on a far expedition among the forests of the North and

make an exhaustive search.  There must certainly be another one

somewhere, and this one will be less dangerous when it has company

of its own species.  I will go straightway; but I will muzzle this

one first.



Three Months Later



It has been a weary, weary hunt, yet I have had no success.  In

the mean time, without stirring from the home estate, she has

caught another one!  I never saw such luck.  I might have hunted

these woods a hundred years, I never should have run across that

thing.



Next Day



I have been comparing the new one with the old one, and it is

perfectly plain that they are the same breed.  I was going to stuff

one of them for my collection, but she is prejudiced against it

for some reason or other; so I have relinquished the idea, though

I think it is a mistake.  It would be an irreparable loss to science

if they should get away.  The old one is tamer than it was, and

can laugh and talk like the parrot, having learned this, no doubt,

from being with the parrot so much, and having the imitative faculty

in a highly developed degree.  I shall be astonished if it turns

out to be a new kind of parrot, and yet I ought not to be astonished,

for it has already been everything else it could think of, since

those first days when it was a fish.  The new one is as ugly now

as the old one was at first; has the same sulphur-and-raw-meat

complexion and the same singular head without any fur on it.  She

calls it Abel.



Ten Years Later



They are boys; we found it out long ago.  It was their coming in

that small, immature shape that puzzled us; we were not used to it.

There are some girls now.  Abel is a good boy, but if Cain had

stayed a bear it would have improved him.  After all these years,

I see that I was mistaken about Eve in the beginning; it is better

to live outside the Garden with her than inside it without her.

At first I thought she talked too much; but now I should be sorry

to have that voice fall silent and pass out of my life.  Blessed

be the chestnut that brought us near together and taught me to

know the goodness of her heart and the sweetness of her spirit!





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Extracts From Adam's Diary

by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













IN DEFENSE OF HARRIET SHELLEY



by Mark Twain







I



I have committed sins, of course; but I have not committed enough of them

to entitle me to the punishment of reduction to the bread and water of

ordinary literature during six years when I might have been living on the

fat diet spread for the righteous in Professor Dowden's Life of Shelley,

if I had been justly dealt with.



During these six years I have been living a life of peaceful ignorance.

I was not aware that Shelley's first wife was unfaithful to him, and that

that was why he deserted her and wiped the stain from his sensitive honor

by entering into soiled relations with Godwin's young daughter.  This was

all new to me when I heard it lately, and was told that the proofs of it

were in this book, and that this book's verdict is accepted in the girls'

colleges of America and its view taught in their literary classes.



In each of these six years multitudes of young people in our country have

arrived at the Shelley-reading age.  Are these six multitudes

unacquainted with this life of Shelley?  Perhaps they are; indeed, one

may feel pretty sure that the great bulk of them are.  To these, then, I

address myself, in the hope that some account of this romantic historical

fable and the fabulist's manner of constructing and adorning it may

interest them.



First, as to its literary style.  Our negroes in America have several

ways of entertaining themselves which are not found among the whites

anywhere.  Among these inventions of theirs is one which is particularly

popular with them.  It is a competition in elegant deportment.  They hire

a hall and bank the spectators' seats in rising tiers along the two

sides, leaving all the middle stretch of the floor free.  A cake is

provided as a prize for the winner in the competition, and a bench of

experts in deportment is appointed to award it.  Sometimes there are as

many as fifty contestants, male and female, and five hundred spectators.

One at a time the contestants enter, clothed regardless of expense in

what each considers the perfection of style and taste, and walk down the

vacant central space and back again with that multitude of critical eyes

on them.  All that the competitor knows of fine airs and graces he throws

into his carriage, all that he knows of seductive expression he throws

into his countenance.  He may use all the helps he can devise: watch-

chain to twirl with his fingers, cane to do graceful things with, snowy

handkerchief to flourish and get artful effects out of, shiny new

stovepipe hat to assist in his courtly bows; and the colored lady may

have a fan to work up her effects with, and smile over and blush behind,

and she may add other helps, according to her judgment.  When the review

by individual detail is over, a grand review of all the contestants in

procession follows, with all the airs and graces and all the bowings and

smirkings on exhibition at once, and this enables the bench of experts to

make the necessary comparisons and arrive at a verdict.  The successful

competitor gets the prize which I have before mentioned, and an abundance

of applause and envy along with it.  The negroes have a name for this

grave deportment-tournament; a name taken from the prize contended for.

They call it a Cakewalk.



This Shelley biography is a literary cake-walk.  The ordinary forms of

speech are absent from it.  All the pages, all the paragraphs, walk by

sedately, elegantly, not to say mincingly, in their Sunday-best, shiny

and sleek, perfumed, and with boutonnieres in their button-holes; it is

rare to find even a chance sentence that has forgotten to dress.  If the

book wishes to tell us that Mary Godwin, child of sixteen, had known

afflictions, the fact saunters forth in this nobby outfit: "Mary was

herself not unlearned in the lore of pain"--meaning by that that she had

not always traveled on asphalt; or, as some authorities would frame it,

that she had "been there herself," a form which, while preferable to the

book's form, is still not to be recommended.  If the book wishes to tell

us that Harriet Shelley hired a wet-nurse, that commonplace fact gets

turned into a dancing-master, who does his professional bow before us in

pumps and knee-breeches, with his fiddle under one arm and his crush-hat

under the other, thus: "The beauty of Harriet's motherly relation to her

babe was marred in Shelley's eyes by the introduction into his house of a

hireling nurse to whom was delegated the mother's tenderest office."



This is perhaps the strangest book that has seen the light since

Frankenstein.  Indeed, it is a Frankenstein itself; a Frankenstein with

the original infirmity supplemented by a new one; a Frankenstein with the

reasoning faculty wanting.  Yet it believes it can reason, and is always

trying.  It is not content to leave a mountain of fact standing in the

clear sunshine, where the simplest reader can perceive its form, its

details, and its relation to the rest of the landscape, but thinks it

must help him examine it and understand it; so its drifting mind settles

upon it with that intent, but always with one and the same result: there

is a change of temperature and the mountain is hid in a fog.  Every time

it sets up a premise and starts to reason from it, there is a surprise in

store for the reader.  It is strangely nearsighted, cross-eyed, and

purblind.  Sometimes when a mastodon walks across the field of its vision

it takes it for a rat; at other times it does not see it at all.



The materials of this biographical fable are facts, rumors, and poetry.

They are connected together and harmonized by the help of suggestion,

conjecture, innuendo, perversion, and semi-suppression.



The fable has a distinct object in view, but this object is not

acknowledged in set words.  Percy Bysshe Shelley has done something which

in the case of other men is called a grave crime; it must be shown that

in his case it is not that, because he does not think as other men do

about these things.



Ought not that to be enough, if the fabulist is serious?  Having proved

that a crime is not a crime, was it worth while to go on and fasten the

responsibility of a crime which was not a crime upon somebody else?  What

is the use of hunting down and holding to bitter account people who are

responsible for other people's innocent acts?



Still, the fabulist thinks it a good idea to do that.  In his view

Shelley's first wife, Harriet, free of all offense as far as we have

historical facts for guidance, must be held unforgivably responsible for

her husband's innocent act in deserting her and taking up with another

woman.



Any one will suspect that this task has its difficulties.  Any one will

divine that nice work is necessary here, cautious work, wily work, and

that there is entertainment to be had in watching the magician do it.

There is indeed entertainment in watching him.  He arranges his facts,

his rumors, and his poems on his table in full view of the house, and

shows you that everything is there--no deception, everything fair and

above board.  And this is apparently true, yet there is a defect, for

some of his best stock is hid in an appendix-basket behind the door, and

you do not come upon it until the exhibition is over and the enchantment

of your mind accomplished--as the magician thinks.



There is an insistent atmosphere of candor and fairness about this book

which is engaging at first, then a little burdensome, then a trifle

fatiguing, then progressively suspicious, annoying, irritating, and

oppressive.  It takes one some little time to find out that phrases which

seem intended to guide the reader aright are there to mislead him; that

phrases which seem intended to throw light are there to throw darkness;

that phrases which seem intended to interpret a fact are there to

misinterpret it; that phrases which seem intended to forestall prejudice

are there to create it; that phrases which seem antidotes are poisons in

disguise.  The naked facts arrayed in the book establish Shelley's guilt

in that one episode which disfigures his otherwise superlatively lofty

and beautiful life; but the historian's careful and methodical

misinterpretation of them transfers the responsibility to the wife's

shoulders as he persuades himself.  The few meagre facts of Harriet

Shelley's life, as furnished by the book, acquit her of offense; but by

calling in the forbidden helps of rumor, gossip, conjecture, insinuation,

and innuendo he destroys her character and rehabilitates Shelley's--as he

believes.  And in truth his unheroic work has not been barren of the

results he aimed at; as witness the assertion made to me that girls in

the colleges of America are taught that Harriet Shelley put a stain upon

her husband's honor, and that that was what stung him into repurifying

himself by deserting her and his child and entering into scandalous

relations with a school-girl acquaintance of his.



If that assertion is true, they probably use a reduction of this work in

those colleges, maybe only a sketch outlined from it.  Such a thing as

that could be harmful and misleading.  They ought to cast it out and put

the whole book in its place.  It would not deceive.  It would not deceive

the janitor.



All of this book is interesting on account of the sorcerer's methods and

the attractiveness of some of his characters and the repulsiveness of the

rest, but no part of it is so much so as are the chapters wherein he

tries to think he thinks he sets forth the causes which led to Shelley's

desertion of his wife in 1814.



Harriet Westbrook was a school-girl sixteen years old.  Shelley was

teeming with advanced thought.  He believed that Christianity was a

degrading and selfish superstition, and he had a deep and sincere desire

to rescue one of his sisters from it.  Harriet was impressed by his

various philosophies and looked upon him as an intellectual wonder--

which indeed he was.  He had an idea that she could give him valuable

help in his scheme regarding his sister; therefore he asked her to

correspond with him.  She was quite willing.  Shelley was not thinking of

love, for he was just getting over a passion for his cousin, Harriet

Grove, and just getting well steeped in one for Miss Hitchener, a school-

teacher.  What might happen to Harriet Westbrook before the letter-

writing was ended did not enter his mind.  Yet an older person could have

made a good guess at it, for in person Shelley was as beautiful as an

angel, he was frank, sweet, winning, unassuming, and so rich in

unselfishness, generosities, and magnanimities that he made his whole

generation seem poor in these great qualities by comparison.  Besides,

he was in distress.  His college had expelled him for writing an

atheistical pamphlet and afflicting the reverend heads of the university

with it, his rich father and grandfather had closed their purses against

him, his friends were cold.  Necessarily, Harriet fell in love with him;

and so deeply, indeed, that there was no way for Shelley to save her from

suicide but to marry her.  He believed himself to blame for this state of

things, so the marriage took place.  He was pretty fairly in love with

Harriet, although he loved Miss Hitchener better.  He wrote and explained

the case to Miss Hitchener after the wedding, and he could not have been

franker or more naive and less stirred up about the circumstance if the

matter in issue had been a commercial transaction involving thirty-five

dollars.



Shelley was nineteen.  He was not a youth, but a man.  He had never had

any youth.  He was an erratic and fantastic child during eighteen years,

then he stepped into manhood, as one steps over a door-sill.  He was

curiously mature at nineteen in his ability to do independent thinking

on the deep questions of life and to arrive at sharply definite decisions

regarding them, and stick to them--stick to them and stand by them at

cost of bread, friendships, esteem, respect, and approbation.



For the sake of his opinions he was willing to sacrifice all these

valuable things, and did sacrifice them; and went on doing it, too, when

he could at any moment have made himself rich and supplied himself with

friends and esteem by compromising with his father, at the moderate

expense of throwing overboard one or two indifferent details of his cargo

of principles.



He and Harriet eloped to Scotland and got married.  They took lodgings in

Edinburgh of a sort answerable to their purse, which was about empty, and

there their life was a happy, one and grew daily more so.  They had only

themselves for company, but they needed no additions to it.  They were as

cozy and contented as birds in a nest.  Harriet sang evenings or read

aloud; also she studied and tried to improve her mind, her husband

instructing her in Latin.  She was very beautiful, she was modest, quiet,

genuine, and, according to her husband's testimony, she had no fine lady

airs or aspirations about her.  In Matthew Arnold's judgment, she was

"a pleasing figure."



The pair remained five weeks in Edinburgh, and then took lodgings in

York, where Shelley's college mate, Hogg, lived.  Shelley presently ran

down to London, and Hogg took this opportunity to make love to the young

wife.  She repulsed him, and reported the fact to her husband when he got

back.  It seems a pity that Shelley did not copy this creditable conduct

of hers some time or other when under temptation, so that we might have

seen the author of his biography hang the miracle in the skies and squirt

rainbows at it.



At the end of the first year of marriage--the most trying year for any

young couple, for then the mutual failings are coming one by one to

light, and the necessary adjustments are being made in pain and

tribulation--Shelley was able to recognize that his marriage venture had

been a safe one.  As we have seen, his love for his wife had begun in a

rather shallow way and with not much force, but now it was become deep

and strong, which entitles his wife to a broad credit mark, one may

admit.  He addresses a long and loving poem to her, in which both passion

and worship appear:



Exhibit A



                                        "O thou

          Whose dear love gleamed upon the gloomy path

          Which this lone spirit travelled,

          . . . . . . . . . . . . .

          . . .  wilt thou not turn

          Those spirit-beaming eyes and look on me.

          Until I be assured that Earth is Heaven

          And Heaven is Earth?

           . . . . . . . .

          Harriet! let death all mortal ties dissolve,

          But ours shall not be mortal."





Shelley also wrote a sonnet to her in August of this same year in

celebration of her birthday:



Exhibit B



         "Ever as now with hove and Virtue's glow

          May thy unwithering soul not cease to burn,

          Still may thine heart with those pure thoughts o'erflow

          Which force from mine such quick and warm return."





Was the girl of seventeen glad and proud and happy?  We may conjecture

that she was.



That was the year 1812.  Another year passed still happily, still

successfully--a child was born in June, 1813, and in September, three

months later, Shelley addresses a poem to this child, Ianthe, in which he

points out just when the little creature is most particularly dear to

him:



Exhibit C



          "Dearest when most thy tender traits express

          The image of thy mother's loveliness."





Up to this point the fabulist counsel for Shelley and prosecutor of his

young wife has had easy sailing, but now his trouble begins, for Shelley

is getting ready to make some unpleasant history for himself, and it will

be necessary to put the blame of it on the wife.



Shelley had made the acquaintance of a charming gray-haired, young-

hearted Mrs. Boinville, whose face "retained a certain youthful beauty";

she lived at Bracknell, and had a young daughter named Cornelia Turner,

who was equipped with many fascinations.  Apparently these people were

sufficiently sentimental.  Hogg says of Mrs. Boinville:



          "The greater part of her associates were odious.  I generally

          found there two or three sentimental young butchers, an

          eminently philosophical tinker, and several very

          unsophisticated medical practitioners or medical students, all

          of low origin and vulgar and offensive manners.  They sighed,

          turned up their eyes, retailed philosophy, such as it was,"

          etc.



Shelley moved to Bracknell, July 27th (this is still 1813) purposely to

be near this unwholesome prairie-dogs' nest.  The fabulist says: "It was

the entrance into a world more amiable and exquisite than he had yet

known."



"In this acquaintance the attraction was mutual"--and presently it grew

to be very mutual indeed, between Shelley and Cornelia Turner, when they

got to studying the Italian poets together.  Shelley, "responding like a

tremulous instrument to every breath of passion or of sentiment," had his

chance here.  It took only four days for Cornelia's attractions to begin

to dim Harriet's.  Shelley arrived on the 27th of July; on the 31st he

wrote a sonnet to Harriet in which "one detects already the little rift

in the lover's lute which had seemed to be healed or never to have gaped

at all when the later and happier sonnet to Ianthe was written"--in

September, we remember:



Exhibit D



          "EVENING.  TO HARRIET



          "O thou bright Sun!  Beneath the dark blue line

          Of western distance that sublime descendest,

          And, gleaming lovelier as thy beams decline,

          Thy million hues to every vapor lendest,

          And over cobweb, lawn, and grove, and stream

          Sheddest the liquid magic of thy light,

          Till calm Earth, with the parting splendor bright,

          Shows like the vision of a beauteous dream;

          What gazer now with astronomic eye

          Could coldly count the spots within thy sphere?

          Such were thy lover, Harriet, could he fly

          The thoughts of all that makes his passion dear,

          And turning senseless from thy warm caress

          Pick flaws in our close-woven happiness."





I cannot find the "rift"; still it may be there.  What the poem seems to

say is, that a person would be coldly ungrateful who could consent to

count and consider little spots and flaws in such a warm, great,

satisfying sun as Harriet is.  It is a "little rift which had seemed to

be healed, or never to have gaped at all."  That is, "one detects" a

little rift which perhaps had never existed.  How does one do that?

How does one see the invisible?  It is the fabulist's secret; he knows

how to detect what does not exist, he knows how to see what is not

seeable; it is his gift, and he works it many a time to poor dead Harriet

Shelley's deep damage.



"As yet, however, if there was a speck upon Shelley's happiness it was no

more than a speck"--meaning the one which one detects where "it may never

have gaped at all"--"nor had Harriet cause for discontent."



Shelley's Latin instructions to his wife had ceased.  "From a teacher he

had now become a pupil."  Mrs. Boinville and her young married daughter

Cornelia were teaching him Italian poetry; a fact which warns one to

receive with some caution that other statement that Harriet had no

"cause for discontent."



Shelley had stopped instructing Harriet in Latin, as before mentioned.

The biographer thinks that the busy life in London some time back, and

the intrusion of the baby, account for this.  These were hindrances, but

were there no others?  He is always overlooking a detail here and there

that might be valuable in helping us understand a situation.  For

instance, when a man has been hard at work at the Italian poets with a

pretty woman, hour after hour, and responding like a tremulous instrument

to every breath of passion or of sentiment in the meantime, that man is

dog-tired when he gets home, and he can't teach his wife Latin; it would

be unreasonable to expect it.



Up to this time we have submitted to having Mrs. Boinville pushed upon

us as ostensibly concerned in these Italian lessons, but the biographer

drops her now, of his own accord.  Cornelia "perhaps" is sole teacher.

Hogg says she was a prey to a kind of sweet melancholy, arising from

causes purely imaginary; she required consolation, and found it in

Petrarch.  He also says, "Bysshe entered at once fully into her views and

caught the soft infection, breathing the tenderest and sweetest

melancholy, as every true poet ought."



Then the author of the book interlards a most stately and fine compliment

to Cornelia, furnished by a man of approved judgment who knew her well

"in later years."  It is a very good compliment indeed, and she no doubt

deserved it in her "later years," when she had for generations ceased to

be sentimental and lackadaisical, and was no longer engaged in enchanting

young husbands and sowing sorrow for young wives.  But why is that

compliment to that old gentlewoman intruded there?  Is it to make the

reader believe she was well-chosen and safe society for a young,

sentimental husband?  The biographer's device was not well planned.  That

old person was not present--it was her other self that was there, her

young, sentimental, melancholy, warm-blooded self, in those early sweet

times before antiquity had cooled her off and mossed her back.



"In choosing for friends such women as Mrs. Newton, Mrs. Boinville, and

Cornelia Turner, Shelley gave good proof of his insight and

discrimination."  That is the fabulist's opinion--Harriet Shelley's is

not reported.



Early in August, Shelley was in London trying to raise money.  In

September he wrote the poem to the baby, already quoted from.  In

the first week of October Shelley and family went to Warwick, then

to Edinburgh, arriving there about the middle of the month.



"Harriet was happy."  Why?  The author furnishes a reason, but hides from

us whether it is history or conjecture; it is because "the babe had borne

the journey well."  It has all the aspect of one of his artful devices--

flung in in his favorite casual way--the way he has when he wants to draw

one's attention away from an obvious thing and amuse it with some trifle

that is less obvious but more useful--in a history like this.  The

obvious thing is, that Harriet was happy because there was much territory

between her husband and Cornelia Turner now; and because the perilous

Italian lessons were taking a rest; and because, if there chanced to be

any respondings like a tremulous instrument to every breath of passion or

of sentiment in stock in these days, she might hope to get a share of

them herself; and because, with her husband liberated, now, from the

fetid fascinations of that sentimental retreat so pitilessly described by

Hogg, who also dubbed it "Shelley's paradise" later, she might hope to

persuade him to stay away from it permanently; and because she might also

hope that his brain would cool, now, and his heart become healthy, and

both brain and heart consider the situation and resolve that it would be

a right and manly thing to stand by this girl-wife and her child and see

that they were honorably dealt with, and cherished and protected and

loved by the man that had promised these things, and so be made happy and

kept so.  And because, also--may we conjecture this?--we may hope for

the privilege of taking up our cozy Latin lessons again, that used to be

so pleasant, and brought us so near together--so near, indeed, that often

our heads touched, just as heads do over Italian lessons; and our hands

met in casual and unintentional, but still most delicious and thrilling

little contacts and momentary clasps, just as they inevitably do over

Italian lessons.  Suppose one should say to any young wife: "I find that

your husband is poring over the Italian poets and being instructed in the

beautiful Italian language by the lovely Cornelia Robinson"--would that

cozy picture fail to rise before her mind? would its possibilities fail

to suggest themselves to her? would there be a pang in her heart and a

blush on her face? or, on the contrary, would the remark give her

pleasure, make her joyous and gay?  Why, one needs only to make the

experiment--the result will not be uncertain.



However, we learn--by authority of deeply reasoned and searching

conjecture--that the baby bore the journey well, and that that was why

the young wife was happy.  That accounts for two per cent. of the

happiness, but it was not right to imply that it accounted for the other

ninety-eight also.



Peacock, a scholar, poet, and friend of the Shelleys, was of their party

when they went away.  He used to laugh at the Boinville menagerie, and

"was not a favorite."  One of the Boinville group, writing to Hogg, said,

"The Shelleys have made an addition to their party in the person of a

cold scholar, who, I think, has neither taste nor feeling.  This, Shelley

will perceive sooner or later, for his warm nature craves sympathy."

True, and Shelley will fight his way back there to get it--there will be

no way to head him off.



Towards the end of November it was necessary for Shelley to pay a

business visit to London, and he conceived the project of leaving Harriet

and the baby in Edinburgh with Harriet's sister, Eliza Westbrook,

a sensible, practical maiden lady about thirty years old, who had spent

a great part of her time with the family since the marriage.  She was

an estimable woman, and Shelley had had reason to like her, and did like

her; but along about this time his feeling towards her changed.  Part of

Shelley's plan, as he wrote Hogg, was to spend his London evenings with

the Newtons--members of the Boinville Hysterical Society.  But, alas,

when he arrived early in December, that pleasant game was partially

blocked, for Eliza and the family arrived with him.  We are left

destitute of conjectures at this point by the biographer, and it is my

duty to supply one.  I chance the conjecture that it was Eliza who

interfered with that game.  I think she tried to do what she could

towards modifying the Boinville connection, in the interest of her young

sister's peace and honor.



If it was she who blocked that game, she was not strong enough to block

the next one.  Before the month and year were out--no date given, let us

call it Christmas--Shelley and family were nested in a furnished house in

Windsor, "at no great distance from the Boinvilles"--these decoys still

residing at Bracknell.



What we need, now, is a misleading conjecture.  We get it with

characteristic promptness and depravity:



          "But Prince Athanase found not the aged Zonoras, the friend of

          his boyhood, in any wanderings to Windsor.  Dr. Lind had died

          a year since, and with his death Windsor must have lost, for

          Shelley, its chief attraction."



Still, not to mention Shelley's wife, there was Bracknell, at any rate.

While Bracknell remains, all solace is not lost.  Shelley is represented

by this biographer as doing a great many careless things, but to my mind

this hiring a furnished house for three months in order to be with a man

who has been dead a year, is the carelessest of them all.  One feels for

him--that is but natural, and does us honor besides--yet one is vexed,

for all that.  He could have written and asked about the aged Zonoras

before taking the house.  He may not have had the address, but that is

nothing--any postman would know the aged Zonoras; a dead postman would

remember a name like that.



And yet, why throw a rag like this to us ravening wolves?  Is it

seriously supposable that we will stop to chew it and let our prey

escape?  No, we are getting to expect this kind of device, and to give it

merely a sniff for certainty's sake and then walk around it and leave it

lying.  Shelley was not after the aged Zonoras; he was pointed for

Cornelia and the Italian lessons, for his warm nature was craving

sympathy.





II



The year 1813 is just ended now, and we step into 1814.



To recapitulate, how much of Cornelia's society has Shelley had, thus

far?  Portions of August and September, and four days of July.  That is

to say, he has had opportunity to enjoy it, more or less, during that

brief period.  Did he want some more of it?  We must fall back upon

history, and then go to conjecturing.



          "In the early part of the year 1814, Shelley was a frequent

          visitor at Bracknell."



"Frequent" is a cautious word, in this author's mouth; the very

cautiousness of it, the vagueness of it, provokes suspicion; it makes one

suspect that this frequency was more frequent than the mere common

everyday kinds of frequency which one is in the habit of averaging up

with the unassuming term "frequent."  I think so because they fixed up a

bedroom for him in the Boinville house.  One doesn't need a bedroom if

one is only going to run over now and then in a disconnected way to

respond like a tremulous instrument to every breath of passion or of

sentiment and rub up one's Italian poetry a little.



The young wife was not invited, perhaps.  If she was, she most certainly

did not come, or she would have straightened the room up; the most

ignorant of us knows that a wife would not endure a room in the condition

in which Hogg found this one when he occupied it one night.  Shelley was

away--why, nobody can divine.  Clothes were scattered about, there were

books on every side: "Wherever a book could be laid was an open book

turned down on its face to keep its place."  It seems plain that the wife

was not invited.  No, not that; I think she was invited, but said to

herself that she could not bear to go there and see another young woman

touching heads with her husband over an Italian book and making thrilling

hand-contacts with him accidentally.



As remarked, he was a frequent visitor there, "where he found an easeful

resting-place in the house of Mrs. Boinville--the white-haired Maimuna--

and of her daughter, Mrs. Turner."  The aged Zonoras was deceased, but

the white-haired Maimuna was still on deck, as we see.  "Three charming

ladies entertained the mocker (Hogg) with cups of tea, late hours,

Wieland's Agathon, sighs and smiles, and the celestial manna of refined

sentiment."



"Such," says Hogg, "were the delights of Shelley's paradise in

Bracknell."



The white-haired Maimuna presently writes to Hogg:



          "I will not have you despise home-spun pleasures.  Shelley is

          making a trial of them with us--"



A trial of them.  It may be called that.  It was March 11, and he had

been in the house a month.  She continues:



          Shelley "likes then so well that he is resolved to leave off

          rambling--"



But he has already left it off.  He has been there a month.



          "And begin a course of them himself."



But he has already begun it.  He has been at it a month.  He likes it so

well that he has forgotten all about his wife, as a letter of his

reveals.



          "Seriously, I think his mind and body want rest."



Yet he has been resting both for a month, with Italian, and tea, and

manna of sentiment, and late hours, and every restful thing a young

husband could need for the refreshment of weary limbs and a sore

conscience, and a nagging sense of shabbiness and treachery.



          "His journeys after what he has never found have racked his

          purse and his tranquillity.  He is resolved to take a little

          care of the former, in pity to the latter, which I applaud, and

          shall second with all, my might."



But she does not say whether the young wife, a stranger and lonely

yonder, wants another woman and her daughter Cornelia to be lavishing so

much inflamed interest on her husband or not.  That young wife is always

silent--we are never allowed to hear from her.  She must have opinions

about such things, she cannot be indifferent, she must be approving or

disapproving, surely she would speak if she were allowed--even to-day and

from her grave she would, if she could, I think--but we get only the

other side, they keep her silent always.



          "He has deeply interested us.  In the course of your intimacy

          he must have made you feel what we now feel for him.  He is

          seeking a house close to us--"



Ah! he is not close enough yet, it seems--



          "and if he succeeds we shall have an additional motive to

          induce you to come among us in the summer."



The reader would puzzle a long time and not guess the biographer's

comment upon the above letter.  It is this:



          "These sound like words of s considerate and judicious friend."



That is what he thinks.  That is, it is what he thinks he thinks.  No,

that is not quite it: it is what he thinks he can stupefy a particularly

and unspeakably dull reader into thinking it is what he thinks.  He makes

that comment with the knowledge that Shelley is in love with this woman's

daughter, and that it is because of the fascinations of these two that

Shelley has deserted his wife--for this month, considering all the

circumstances, and his new passion, and his employment of the time,

amounted to desertion; that is its rightful name.  We cannot know how the

wife regarded it and felt about it; but if she could have read the letter

which Shelley was writing to Hogg four or five days later, we could guess

her thought and how she felt.  Hear him:

          . . . . . . .

          "I have been staying with Mrs. Boinville for the last month;

          I have escaped, in the society of all that philosophy and

          friendship combine, from the dismaying solitude of myself."



It is fair to conjecture that he was feeling ashamed.



          "They have revived in my heart the expiring flame of life.

          I have felt myself translated to a paradise which has nothing

          of mortality but its transitoriness; my heart sickens at the

          view of that necessity which will quickly divide me from the

          delightful tranquillity of this happy home--for it has become

          my home.

          . . . . . . .

          "Eliza is still with us--not here!--but will be with me when

          the infinite malice of destiny forces me to depart."



Eliza is she who blocked that game--the game in London--the one where we

were purposing to dine every night with one of the "three charming

ladies" who fed tea and manna and late hours to Hogg at Bracknell.



Shelley could send Eliza away, of course; could have cleared her out long

ago if so minded, just as he had previously done with a predecessor of

hers whom he had first worshipped and then turned against; but perhaps

she was useful there as a thin excuse for staying away himself.



          "I am now but little inclined to contest this point.

          I certainly hate her with all my heart and soul .  .  .  .



          "It is a sight which awakens an inexpressible sensation of

          disgust and horror, to see her caress my poor little Ianthe,

          in whom I may hereafter find the consolation of sympathy.

          I sometimes feel faint with the fatigue of checking the

          overflowings of my unbounded abhorrence for this miserable

          wretch.  But she is no more than a blind and loathsome worm,

          that cannot see to sting.



          "I have begun to learn Italian again .  .  .  .  Cornelia

          assists me in this language.  Did I not once tell you that I

          thought her cold and reserved?  She is the reverse of this, as

          she is the reverse of everything bad.  She inherits all the

          divinity of her mother .  .  .  .  I have sometimes forgotten

          that I am not an inmate of this delightful home--that a time

          will come which will cast me again into the boundless ocean of

          abhorred society.



          "I have written nothing but one stanza, which has no meaning,

          and that I have only written in thought:



                    "Thy dewy looks sink in my breast;

                    Thy gentle words stir poison there;

                    Thou hast disturbed the only rest

                    That was the portion of despair.

                    Subdued to duty's hard control,

                    I could have borne my wayward lot:

                    The chains that bind this rained soul

                    Had cankered then, but crushed it not.



          "This is the vision of a delirious and distempered dream, which

          passes away at the cold clear light of morning.  Its surpassing

          excellence and exquisite perfections have no more reality than

          the color of an autumnal sunset."



Then it did not refer to his wife.  That is plain; otherwise he would

have said so.  It is well that he explained that it has no meaning, for

if he had not done that, the previous soft references to Cornelia and the

way he has come to feel about her now would make us think she was the

person who had inspired it while teaching him how to read the warm and

ruddy Italian poets during a month.



The biography observes that portions of this letter "read like the tired

moaning of a wounded creature."  Guesses at the nature of the wound are

permissible; we will hazard one.



Read by the light of Shelley's previous history, his letter seems to be

the cry of a tortured conscience.  Until this time it was a conscience

that had never felt a pang or known a smirch.  It was the conscience of

one who, until this time, had never done a dishonorable thing, or an

ungenerous, or cruel, or treacherous thing, but was now doing all of

these, and was keenly aware of it.  Up to this time Shelley had been

master of his nature, and it was a nature which was as beautiful and as

nearly perfect as any merely human nature may be.  But he was drunk now,

with a debasing passion, and was not himself.  There is nothing in his

previous history that is in character with the Shelley of this letter.

He had done boyish things, foolish things, even crazy things, but never

a thing to be ashamed of.  He had done things which one might laugh at,

but the privilege of laughing was limited always to the thing itself;

you could not laugh at the motive back of it--that was high, that was

noble.  His most fantastic and quixotic acts had a purpose back of them

which made them fine, often great, and made the rising laugh seem

profanation and quenched it; quenched it, and changed the impulse to

homage.



Up to this time he had been loyalty itself, where his obligations lay--

treachery was new to him; he had never done an ignoble thing--baseness

was new to him; he had never done an unkind thing that also was new to

him.



This was the author of that letter, this was the man who had deserted his

young wife and was lamenting, because he must leave another woman's house

which had become a "home" to him, and go away.  Is he lamenting mainly

because he must go back to his wife and child?  No, the lament is mainly

for what he is to leave behind him.  The physical comforts of the house?

No, in his life he had never attached importance to such things.  Then

the thing which he grieves to leave is narrowed down to a person--to the

person whose "dewy looks" had sunk into his breast, and whose seducing

words had "stirred poison there."



He was ashamed of himself, his conscience was upbraiding him.  He was the

slave of a degrading love; he was drunk with his passion, the real

Shelley was in temporary eclipse.  This is the verdict which his previous

history must certainly deliver upon this episode, I think.



One must be allowed to assist himself with conjectures like these when

trying to find his way through a literary swamp which has so many

misleading finger-boards up as this book is furnished with.



We have now arrived at a part of the swamp where the difficulties and

perplexities are going to be greater than any we have yet met with--

where, indeed, the finger-boards are multitudinous, and the most of them

pointing diligently in the wrong direction.  We are to be told by the

biography why Shelley deserted his wife and child and took up with

Cornelia Turner and Italian.  It was not on account of Cornelia's sighs

and sentimentalities and tea and manna and late hours and soft and sweet

and industrious enticements; no, it was because "his happiness in his

home had been wounded and bruised almost to death."



It had been wounded and bruised almost to death in this way:



1st.  Harriet persuaded him to set up a carriage.



2d.  After the intrusion of the baby, Harriet stopped reading aloud and

studying.



3d.  Harriet's walks with Hogg "commonly conducted us to some fashionable

bonnet-shop."



4th.  Harriet hired a wet-nurse.



5th.  When an operation was being performed upon the baby, "Harriet stood

by, narrowly observing all that was done, but, to the astonishment of the

operator, betraying not the smallest sign of emotion."



6th.  Eliza Westbrook, sister-in-law, was still of the household.



The evidence against Harriet Shelley is all in; there is no more.  Upon

these six counts she stands indicted of the crime of driving her husband

into that sty at Bracknell; and this crime, by these helps, the

biographical prosecuting attorney has set himself the task of proving

upon her.



Does the biographer call himself the attorney for the prosecution?

No, only to himself, privately; publicly he is the passionless,

disinterested, impartial judge on the bench.  He holds up his judicial

scales before the world, that all may see; and it all tries to look so

fair that a blind person would sometimes fail to see him slip the false

weights in.



Shelley's happiness in his home had been wounded and bruised almost to

death, first, because Harriet had persuaded him to set up a carriage.

I cannot discover that any evidence is offered that she asked him to set

up a carriage.  Still, if she did, was it a heavy offence?  Was it

unique?  Other young wives had committed it before, others have committed

it since.  Shelley had dearly loved her in those London days; possibly he

set up the carriage gladly to please her; affectionate young husbands do

such things.  When Shelley ran away with another girl, by-and-by, this

girl persuaded him to pour the price of many carriages and many horses

down the bottomless well of her father's debts, but this impartial judge

finds no fault with that.  Once she appeals to Shelley to raise money--

necessarily by borrowing, there was no other way--to pay her father's

debts with at a time when Shelley was in danger of being arrested and

imprisoned for his own debts; yet the good judge finds no fault with her

even for this.



First and last, Shelley emptied into that rapacious mendicant's lap a sum

which cost him--for he borrowed it at ruinous rates--from eighty to one

hundred thousand dollars.  But it was Mary Godwin's papa, the

supplications were often sent through Mary, the good judge is Mary's

strenuous friend, so Mary gets no censures.  On the Continent Mary rode

in her private carriage, built, as Shelley boasts, "by one of the best

makers in Bond Street," yet the good judge makes not even a passing

comment on this iniquity.  Let us throw out Count No. 1 against Harriet

Shelley as being far-fetched, and frivolous.



Shelley's happiness in his home had been wounded and bruised almost to

death, secondly, because Harriet's studies "had dwindled away to nothing,

Bysshe had ceased to express any interest in them."  At what time was

this?  It was when Harriet "had fully recovered from the fatigue of her

first effort of maternity .  .  .  and was now in full force, vigor, and

effect."  Very well, the baby was born two days before the close of June.

It took the mother a month to get back her full force, vigor, and effect;

this brings us to July 27th and the deadly Cornelia.  If a wife of

eighteen is studying with her husband and he gets smitten with another

woman, isn't he likely to lose interest in his wife's studies for that

reason, and is not his wife's interest in her studies likely to languish

for the same reason?  Would not the mere sight of those books of hers

sharpen the pain that is in her heart?  This sudden breaking down of a

mutual intellectual interest of two years' standing is coincident with

Shelley's re-encounter with Cornelia; and we are allowed to gather from

that time forth for nearly two months he did all his studying in that

person's society.  We feel at liberty to rule out Count No. 2 from the

indictment against Harriet.



Shelley's happiness in his home had been wounded and bruised almost to

death, thirdly, because Harriet's walks with Hogg commonly led to some

fashionable bonnet-shop.  I offer no palliation; I only ask why the

dispassionate, impartial judge did not offer one himself--merely, I mean,

to offset his leniency in a similar case or two where the girl who ran

away with Harriet's husband was the shopper.  There are several occasions

where she interested herself with shopping--among them being walks which

ended at the bonnet-shop--yet in none of these cases does she get a word

of blame from the good judge, while in one of them he covers the deed

with a justifying remark, she doing the shopping that time to find

easement for her mind, her child having died.



Shelley's happiness in his home had been wounded and bruised almost to

death, fourthly, by the introduction there of a wet-nurse.  The wet-nurse

was introduced at the time of the Edinburgh sojourn, immediately after

Shelley had been enjoying the two months of study with Cornelia which

broke up his wife's studies and destroyed his personal interest in them.

Why, by this time, nothing that Shelley's wife could do would have been

satisfactory to him, for he was in love with another woman, and was never

going to be contented again until he got back to her.  If he had been

still in love with his wife it is not easily conceivable that he would

care much who nursed the baby, provided the baby was well nursed.

Harriet's jealousy was assuredly voicing itself now, Shelley's conscience

was assuredly nagging him, pestering him, persecuting him.  Shelley

needed excuses for his altered attitude towards his wife; Providence

pitied him and sent the wet-nurse.  If Providence had sent him a cotton

doughnut it would have answered just as well; all he wanted was something

to find fault with.



Shelley's happiness in his home had been wounded and bruised almost to

death, fifthly, because Harriet narrowly watched a surgical operation

which was being performed upon her child, and, "to the astonishment of

the operator," who was watching Harriet instead of attending to his

operation, she betrayed "not the smallest sign of emotion."  The author

of this biography was not ashamed to set down that exultant slander.

He was apparently not aware that it was a small business to bring into

his court a witness whose name he does not know, and whose character and

veracity there is none to vouch for, and allow him to strike this blow at

the mother-heart of this friendless girl.  The biographer says, "We may

not infer from this that Harriet did not feel"--why put it in, then?--

"but we learn that those about her could believe her to be hard and

insensible."  Who were those who were about her?  Her husband?  He hated

her now, because he was in love elsewhere.  Her sister?  Of course that

is not charged.  Peacock?  Peacock does not testify.  The wet-nurse?  She

does not testify.  If any others were there we have no mention of them.

"Those about her" are reduced to one person--her husband.  Who reports

the circumstance?  It is Hogg.  Perhaps he was there--we do not know.

But if he was, he still got his information at second-hand, as it was the

operator who noticed Harriet's lack of emotion, not himself.  Hogg is not

given to saying kind things when Harriet is his subject.  He may have

said them the time that he tried to tempt her to soil her honor, but

after that he mentions her usually with a sneer.  "Among those who were

about her" was one witness well equipped to silence all tongues, abolish

all doubts, set our minds at rest; one witness, not called, and not

callable, whose evidence, if we could but get it, would outweigh the

oaths of whole battalions of hostile Hoggs and nameless surgeons--the

baby.  I wish we had the baby's testimony; and yet if we had it it would

not do us any good--a furtive conjecture, a sly insinuation, a pious

"if" or two, would be smuggled in, here and there, with a solemn air of

judicial investigation, and its positiveness would wilt into dubiety.



The biographer says of Harriet, "If words of tender affection and

motherly pride proved the reality of love, then undoubtedly she loved her

firstborn child."  That is, if mere empty words can prove it, it stands

proved--and in this way, without committing himself, he gives the reader

a chance to infer that there isn't any extant evidence but words, and

that he doesn't take much stock in them.  How seldom he shows his hand!

He is always lurking behind a non-committal "if" or something of that

kind; always gliding and dodging around, distributing colorless poison

here and there and everywhere, but always leaving himself in a position

to say that his language will be found innocuous if taken to pieces and

examined.  He clearly exhibits a steady and never-relaxing purpose to

make Harriet the scapegoat for her husband's first great sin--but it is

in the general view that this is revealed, not in the details.  His

insidious literature is like blue water; you know what it is that makes

it blue, but you cannot produce and verify any detail of the cloud of

microscopic dust in it that does it.  Your adversary can dip up a

glassful and show you that it is pure white and you cannot deny it; and

he can dip the lake dry, glass by glass, and show that every glassful is

white, and prove it to any one's eye--and yet that lake was blue and you

can swear it.  This book is blue--with slander in solution.



Let the reader examine, for example, the paragraph of comment which

immediately follows the letter containing Shelley's self-exposure which

we have been considering.  This is it.  One should inspect the individual

sentences as they go by, then pass them in procession and review the

cake-walk as a whole:



          "Shelley's happiness in his home, as is evident from this

          pathetic letter, had been fatally stricken; it is evident,

          also, that he knew where duty lay; he felt that his part was to

          take up his burden, silently and sorrowfully, and to bear it

          henceforth with the quietness of despair.  But we can perceive

          that he scarcely possessed the strength and fortitude needful

          for success in such an attempt.  And clearly Shelley himself

          was aware how perilous it was to accept that respite of

          blissful ease which he enjoyed in the Boinville household; for

          gentle voices and dewy looks and words of sympathy could not

          fail to remind him of an ideal of tranquillity or of joy which

          could never be his, and which he must henceforth sternly

          exclude from his imagination."



That paragraph commits the author in no way.  Taken sentence by sentence

it asserts nothing against anybody or in favor of anybody, pleads for

nobody, accuses nobody.  Taken detail by detail, it is as innocent as

moonshine.  And yet, taken as a whole, it is a design against the reader;

its intent is to remove the feeling which the letter must leave with him

if let alone, and put a different one in its place--to remove a feeling

justified by the letter and substitute one not justified by it.  The

letter itself gives you no uncertain picture--no lecturer is needed to

stand by with a stick and point out its details and let on to explain

what they mean.  The picture is the very clear and remorsefully faithful

picture of a fallen and fettered angel who is ashamed of himself; an

angel who beats his soiled wings and cries, who complains to the woman

who enticed him that he could have borne his wayward lot, he could have

stood by his duty if it had not been for her beguilements; an angel who

rails at the "boundless ocean of abhorred society," and rages at his poor

judicious sister-in-law.  If there is any dignity about this spectacle it

will escape most people.



Yet when the paragraph of comment is taken as a whole, the picture is

full of dignity and pathos; we have before us a blameless and noble

spirit stricken to the earth by malign powers, but not conquered;

tempted, but grandly putting the temptation away; enmeshed by subtle

coils, but sternly resolved to rend them and march forth victorious, at

any peril of life or limb.  Curtain--slow music.



Was it the purpose of the paragraph to take the bad taste of Shelley's

letter out of the reader's mouth?  If that was not it, good ink was

wasted; without that, it has no relevancy--the multiplication table would

have padded the space as rationally.



We have inspected the six reasons which we are asked to believe drove a

man of conspicuous patience, honor, justice, fairness, kindliness, and

iron firmness, resolution, and steadfastness, from the wife whom he loved

and who loved him, to a refuge in the mephitic paradise of Bracknell.

These are six infinitely little reasons; but there were six colossal

ones, and these the counsel for the destruction of Harriet Shelley

persists in not considering very important.



Moreover, the colossal six preceded the little six and had done the

mischief before they were born.  Let us double-column the twelve; then we

shall see at a glance that each little reason is in turn answered by a

retorting reason of a size to overshadow it and make it insignificant:



1.  Harriet sets up carriage.      1.  CORNELIA TURNER.

2.  Harriet stops studying.        2.  CORNELIA TURNER.

3.  Harriet goes to bonnet-shop.   3.  CORNELIA TURNER.

4.  Harriet takes a wet-nurse.     4.  CORNELIA TURNER.

5.  Harriet has too much nerve.    5.  CORNELIA TURNER.

6.  Detested sister-in-law         6.  CORNELIA TURNER.



As soon as we comprehend that Cornelia Turner and the Italian lessons

happened before the little six had been discovered to be grievances,

we understand why Shelley's happiness in his home had been wounded and

bruised almost to death, and no one can persuade us into laying it on

Harriet.  Shelley and Cornelia are the responsible persons, and we cannot

in honor and decency allow the cruelties which they practised upon the

unoffending wife to be pushed aside in order to give us a chance to waste

time and tears over six sentimental justifications of an offence which

the six can't justify, nor even respectably assist in justifying.



Six?  There were seven; but in charity to the biographer the seventh

ought not to be exposed.  Still, he hung it out himself, and not only

hung it out, but thought it was a good point in Shelley's favor.  For two

years Shelley found sympathy and intellectual food and all that at home;

there was enough for spiritual and mental support, but not enough for

luxury; and so, at the end of the contented two years, this latter detail

justifies him in going bag and baggage over to Cornelia Turner and

supplying the rest of his need in the way of surplus sympathy and

intellectual pie unlawfully.  By the same reasoning a man in merely

comfortable circumstances may rob a bank without sin.





III



It is 1814, it is the 16th of March, Shelley has, written his letter, he

has been in the Boinville paradise a month, his deserted wife is in her

husbandless home.  Mischief had been wrought.  It is the biographer who

concedes this.  We greatly need some light on Harriet's side of the case

now; we need to know how she enjoyed the month, but there is no way to

inform ourselves; there seems to be a strange absence of documents and

letters and diaries on that side.  Shelley kept a diary, the approaching

Mary Godwin kept a diary, her father kept one, her half-sister by

marriage, adoption, and the dispensation of God kept one, and the entire

tribe and all its friends wrote and received letters, and the letters

were kept and are producible when this biography needs them; but there

are only three or four scraps of Harriet's writing, and no diary.

Harriet wrote plenty of letters to her husband--nobody knows where they

are, I suppose; she wrote plenty of letters to other people--apparently

they have disappeared, too.  Peacock says she wrote good letters, but

apparently interested people had sagacity enough to mislay them in time.

After all her industry she went down into her grave and lies silent

there--silent, when she has so much need to speak.  We can only wonder at

this mystery, not account for it.



No, there is no way of finding out what Harriet's state of feeling was

during the month that Shelley was disporting himself in the Bracknell

paradise.  We have to fall back upon conjecture, as our fabulist does

when he has nothing more substantial to work with.  Then we easily

conjecture that as the days dragged by Harriet's heart grew heavier and

heavier under its two burdens--shame and resentment: the shame of being

pointed at and gossiped about as a deserted wife, and resentment against

the woman who had beguiled her husband from her and now kept him in a

disreputable captivity.  Deserted wives--deserted whether for cause or

without cause--find small charity among the virtuous and the discreet.

We conjecture that one after another the neighbors ceased to call; that

one after another they got to being "engaged" when Harriet called; that

finally they one after the other cut her dead on the street; that after

that she stayed in the house daytimes, and brooded over her sorrows, and

nighttimes did the same, there being nothing else to do with the heavy

hours and the silence and solitude and the dreary intervals which sleep

should have charitably bridged, but didn't.



Yes, mischief had been wrought.  The biographer arrives at this

conclusion, and it is a most just one.  Then, just as you begin to half

hope he is going to discover the cause of it and launch hot bolts of

wrath at the guilty manufacturers of it, you have to turn away

disappointed.  You are disappointed, and you sigh.  This is what he says

--the italics [''] are mine:



          "However the mischief may have been wrought--'and at this day

          no one can wish to heap blame an any buried head'--"



So it is poor Harriet, after all.  Stern justice must take its course--

justice tempered with delicacy, justice tempered with compassion, justice

that pities a forlorn dead girl and refuses to strike her.  Except in the

back.  Will not be ignoble and say the harsh thing, but only insinuate

it.  Stern justice knows about the carriage and the wet-nurse and the

bonnet-shop and the other dark things that caused this sad mischief, and

may not, must not blink them; so it delivers judgment where judgment

belongs, but softens the blow by not seeming to deliver judgment at all.

To resume--the italics are mine:



          "However the mischief may have been wrought--and at this day no

          one can wish to heap blame on any buried head--'it is certain

          that some cause or causes of deep division between Shelley and

          his wife were in operation during the early part of the year

          1814'."



This shows penetration.  No deduction could be more accurate than this.

There were indeed some causes of deep division.  But next comes another

disappointing sentence:



          "To guess at the precise nature of these cafes, in the absence

          of definite statement, were useless."



Why, he has already been guessing at them for several pages, and we have

been trying to outguess him, and now all of a sudden he is tired of it

and won't play any more.  It is not quite fair to us.  However, he will

get over this by-and-by, when Shelley commits his next indiscretion and

has to be guessed out of it at Harriet's expense.



"We may rest content with Shelley's own words"--in a Chancery paper drawn

up by him three years later.  They were these: "Delicacy forbids me to

say more than that we were disunited by incurable dissensions."



As for me, I do not quite see why we should rest content with anything of

the sort.  It is not a very definite statement.  It does not necessarily

mean anything more than that he did not wish to go into the tedious

details of those family quarrels.  Delicacy could quite properly excuse

him from saying, "I was in love with Cornelia all that time; my wife kept

crying and worrying about it and upbraiding me and begging me to cut

myself free from a connection which was wronging her and disgracing us

both; and I being stung by these reproaches retorted with fierce and

bitter speeches--for it is my nature to do that when I am stirred,

especially if the target of them is a person whom I had greatly loved and

respected before, as witness my various attitudes towards Miss Hitchener,

the Gisbornes, Harriet's sister, and others--and finally I did not

improve this state of things when I deserted my wife and spent a whole

month with the woman who had infatuated me."



No, he could not go into those details, and we excuse him; but,

nevertheless, we do not rest content with this bland proposition to puff

away that whole long disreputable episode with a single mean, meaningless

remark of Shelley's.



We do admit that "it is certain that some cause or causes of deep

division were in operation."  We would admit it just the same if the

grammar of the statement were as straight as a string, for we drift into

pretty indifferent grammar ourselves when we are absorbed in historical

work; but we have to decline to admit that we cannot guess those cause or

causes.



But guessing is not really necessary.  There is evidence attainable--

evidence from the batch discredited by the biographer and set out at the

back door in his appendix-basket; and yet a court of law would think

twice before throwing it out, whereas it would be a hardy person who

would venture to offer in such a place a good part of the material which

is placed before the readers of this book as "evidence," and so treated

by this daring biographer.  Among some letters (in the appendix-basket)

from Mrs. Godwin, detailing the Godwinian share in the Shelleyan events

of 1814, she tells how Harriet Shelley came to her and her husband,

agitated and weeping, to implore them to forbid Shelley the house, and

prevent his seeing Mary Godwin.



          "She related that last November he had fallen in love with Mrs.

          Turner and paid her such marked attentions Mr. Turner, the

          husband, had carried off his wife to Devonshire."



The biographer finds a technical fault in this; "the Shelleys were in

Edinburgh in November."  What of that?  The woman is recalling a

conversation which is more than two months old; besides, she was probably

more intent upon the central and important fact of it than upon its

unimportant date.  Harriet's quoted statement has some sense in it; for

that reason, if for no other, it ought to have been put in the body of

the book.  Still, that would not have answered; even the biographer's

enemy could not be cruel enough to ask him to let this real grievance,

this compact and substantial and picturesque figure, this rawhead-and-

bloody-bones, come striding in there among those pale shams, those

rickety spectres labeled WET-NURSE, BONNET-SHOP, and so on--no, the

father of all malice could not ask the biographer to expose his pathetic

goblins to a competition like that.



The fabulist finds fault with the statement because it has a technical

error in it; and he does this at the moment that he is furnishing us an

error himself, and of a graver sort.  He says:



          "If Turner carried off his wife to Devonshire he brought her

          back and Shelley was staying with her and her mother on terms

          of cordial intimacy in March, 1814."



We accept the "cordial intimacy"--it was the very thing Harriet was

complaining of--but there is nothing to show that it was Turner who

brought his wife back.  The statement is thrown in as if it were not only

true, but was proof that Turner was not uneasy.  Turner's movements are

proof of nothing.  Nothing but a statement from Turner's mouth would have

any value here, and he made none.



Six days after writing his letter Shelley and his wife were together

again for a moment--to get remarried according to the rites of the

English Church.



Within three weeks the new husband and wife were apart again, and the

former was back in his odorous paradise.  This time it is the wife who

does the deserting.  She finds Cornelia too strong for her, probably.

At any rate, she goes away with her baby and sister, and we have a

playful fling at her from good Mrs. Boinville, the "mysterious spinner

Maimuna"; she whose "face was as a damsel's face, and yet her hair was

gray"; she of whom the biographer has said, "Shelley was indeed caught in

an almost invisible thread spun around him, but unconsciously, by this

subtle and benignant enchantress."  The subtle and benignant enchantress

writes to Hogg, April 18: "Shelley is again a widower; his beauteous half

went to town on Thursday."



Then Shelley writes a poem--a chant of grief over the hard fate which

obliges him now to leave his paradise and take up with his wife again.

It seems to intimate that the paradise is cooling towards him; that he is

warned off by acclamation; that he must not even venture to tempt with

one last tear his friend Cornelia's ungentle mood, for her eye is glazed

and cold and dares not entreat her lover to stay:



Exhibit E



          "Pause not! the time is past! Every voice cries 'Away!'

          Tempt not with one last tear thy friend's ungentle mood;

          Thy lover's eye, so glazed and cold, dares not entreat thy

          stay:

          Duty and dereliction guide thee back to solitude."



Back to the solitude of his now empty home, that is!



          "Away! away! to thy sad and silent home;

          Pour bitter tears on its desolated hearth."

          . . . . . . . .



But he will have rest in the grave by-and-by.  Until that time comes,

the charms of Bracknell will remain in his memory, along with Mrs.

Boinville's voice and Cornelia Turner's smile:



     "Thou in the grave shalt rest--yet, till the phantoms flee

     Which that house and hearth and garden made dear to thee ere while,

     Thy remembrance and repentance and deep musings are not free

     From the music of two voices and the light of one sweet smile."



We cannot wonder that Harriet could not stand it.  Any of us would have

left.  We would not even stay with a cat that was in this condition.

Even the Boinvilles could not endure it; and so, as we have seen, they

gave this one notice.



          "Early in May, Shelley was in London.  He did not yet despair

          of reconciliation with Harriet, nor had he ceased to love her."



Shelley's poems are a good deal of trouble to his biographer.  They are

constantly inserted as "evidence," and they make much confusion.  As soon

as one of them has proved one thing, another one follows and proves quite

a different thing.  The poem just quoted shows that he was in love with

Cornelia, but a month later he is in love with Harriet again, and there

is a poem to prove it.



          "In this piteous appeal Shelley declares that he has now no

          grief but one--the grief of having known and lost his wife's

          love."



Exhibit F



               "Thy look of love has power to calm

               The stormiest passion of my soul."





But without doubt she had been reserving her looks of love a good part of

the time for ten months, now--ever since he began to lavish his own on

Cornelia Turner at the end of the previous July.  He does really seem to

have already forgotten Cornelia's merits in one brief month, for he

eulogizes Harriet in a way which rules all competition out:



               "Thou only virtuous, gentle, kind,

               Amid a world of hate."



He complains of her hardness, and begs her to make the concession of

a "slight endurance"--of his waywardness, perhaps--for the sake of

"a fellow-being's lasting weal."  But the main force of his appeal is

in his closing stanza, and is strongly worded:



               "O tract for once no erring guide!

               Bid the remorseless feeling flee;

               'Tis malice, 'tis revenge, 'tis pride,

               'Tis anything but thee;

               I deign a nobler pride to prove,

               And pity if thou canst not love."



This is in May--apparently towards the end of it.  Harriet and Shelley

were corresponding all the time.  Harriet got the poem--a copy exists in

her own handwriting; she being the only gentle and kind person amid a

world of hate, according to Shelley's own testimony in the poem, we are

permitted to think that the daily letters would presently have melted

that kind and gentle heart and brought about the reconciliation, if there

had been time but there wasn't; for in a very few days--in fact, before

the 8th of June--Shelley was in love with another woman.



And so--perhaps while Harriet was walking the floor nights, trying to get

her poem by heart--her husband was doing a fresh one--for the other girl

--Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin--with sentiments like these in it:



Exhibit G



               To spend years thus and be rewarded,

               As thou, sweet love, requited me

               When none were near.

               .  .  .  thy lips did meet

               Mine tremblingly; .  .  ,



               "Gentle and good and mild thou art,

               Nor can I live if thou appear

               Aught but thyself." .  .  .





And so on.  "Before the close of June it was known and felt by Mary and

Shelley that each was inexpressibly dear to the other."  Yes, Shelley had

found this child of sixteen to his liking, and had wooed and won her in

the graveyard.  But that is nothing; it was better than wooing her in her

nursery, at any rate, where it might have disturbed the other children.



However, she was a child in years only.  From the day that she set her

masculine grip on Shelley he was to frisk no more.  If she had occupied

the only kind and gentle Harriet's place in March it would have been a

thrilling spectacle to see her invade the Boinville rookery and read the

riot act.  That holiday of Shelley's would have been of short duration,

and Cornelia's hair would have been as gray as her mother's when the

services were over.



Hogg went to the Godwin residence in Skinner Street with Shelley on that

8th of June.  They passed through Godwin's little debt-factory of a book-

shop and went up-stairs hunting for the proprietor.  Nobody there.

Shelley strode about the room impatiently, making its crazy floor quake

under him.  Then a door "was partially and softly opened.  A thrilling

voice called 'Shelley!'  A thrilling voice answered, 'Mary!'  And he

darted out of the room like an arrow from the bow of the far-shooting

King.  A very young female, fair and fair-haired, pale, indeed, and with

a piercing look, wearing a frock of tartan, an unusual dress in London at

that time, had called him out of the room."



This is Mary Godwin, as described by Hogg.  The thrill of the voices

shows that the love of Shelley and Mary was already upward of a fortnight

old; therefore it had been born within the month of May--born while

Harriet was still trying to get her poem by heart, we think.  I must not

be asked how I know so much about that thrill; it is my secret.  The

biographer and I have private ways of finding out things when it is

necessary to find them out and the customary methods fail.



Shelley left London that day, and was gone ten days.  The biographer

conjectures that he spent this interval with Harriet in Bath.  It would

be just like him.  To the end of his days he liked to be in love with two

women at once.  He was more in love with Miss Hitchener when he married

Harriet than he was with Harriet, and told the lady so with simple and

unostentatious candor.  He was more in love with Cornelia than he was

with Harriet in the end of 1813 and the beginning of 1814, yet he

supplied both of them with love poems of an equal temperature meantime;

he loved Mary and Harriet in June, and while getting ready to run off

with the one, it is conjectured that he put in his odd time trying to get

reconciled to the other; by-and-by, while still in love with Mary, he

will make love to her half-sister by marriage, adoption, and the

visitation of God, through the medium of clandestine letters, and she

will answer with letters that are for no eye but his own.



When Shelley encountered Mary Godwin he was looking around for another

paradise.  He had, tastes of his own, and there were features about the

Godwin establishment that strongly recommended it.  Godwin was an

advanced thinker and an able writer.  One of his romances is still read,

but his philosophical works, once so esteemed, are out of vogue now;

their authority was already declining when Shelley made his acquaintance

--that is, it was declining with the public, but not with Shelley.  They

had been his moral and political Bible, and they were that yet.  Shelley

the infidel would himself have claimed to be less a work of God than a

work of Godwin.  Godwin's philosophies had formed his mind and interwoven

themselves into it and become a part of its texture; he regarded himself

as Godwin's spiritual son.  Godwin was not without self-appreciation;

indeed, it may be conjectured that from his point of view the last

syllable of his name was surplusage.  He lived serene in his lofty world

of philosophy, far above the mean interests that absorbed smaller men,

and only came down to the ground at intervals to pass the hat for alms to

pay his debts with, and insult the man that relieved him.  Several of his

principles were out of the ordinary.  For example, he was opposed to

marriage.  He was not aware that his preachings from this text were but

theory and wind; he supposed he was in earnest in imploring people to

live together without marrying, until Shelley furnished him a working

model of his scheme and a practical example to analyze, by applying the

principle in his own family; the matter took a different and surprising

aspect then.  The late Matthew Arnold said that the main defect in

Shelley's make-up was that he was destitute of the sense of humor.  This

episode must have escaped Mr. Arnold's attention.



But we have said enough about the head of the new paradise.  Mrs. Godwin

is described as being in several ways a terror; and even when her soul

was in repose she wore green spectacles.  But I suspect that her main

unattractiveness was born of the fact that she wrote the letters that are

out in the appendix-basket in the back yard--letters which are an outrage

and wholly untrustworthy, for they say some kind things about poor

Harriet and tell some disagreeable truths about her husband; and these

things make the fabulist grit his teeth a good deal.



Next we have Fanny Godwin--a Godwin by courtesy only; she was Mrs.

Godwin's natural daughter by a former friend.  She was a sweet and

winning girl, but she presently wearied of the Godwin paradise, and

poisoned herself.



Last in the list is Jane (or Claire, as she preferred to call herself)

Clairmont, daughter of Mrs. Godwin by a former marriage.  She was very

young and pretty and accommodating, and always ready to do what she could

to make things pleasant.  After Shelley ran off with her part-sister

Mary, she became the guest of the pair, and contributed a natural child

to their nursery--Allegra.  Lord Byron was the father.



We have named the several members and advantages of the new paradise in

Skinner Street, with its crazy book-shop underneath.  Shelley was all

right now, this was a better place than the other; more variety anyway,

and more different kinds of fragrance.  One could turn out poetry here

without any trouble at all.



The way the new love-match came about was this:



Shelley told Mary all his aggravations and sorrows and griefs, and about

the wet-nurse and the bonnetshop and the surgeon and the carriage, and

the sister-in-law that blocked the London game, and about Cornelia and

her mamma, and how they had turned him out of the house after making so

much of him; and how he had deserted Harriet and then Harriet had

deserted him, and how the reconciliation was working along and Harriet

getting her poem by heart; and still he was not happy, and Mary pitied

him, for she had had trouble herself.  But I am not satisfied with this.

It reads too much like statistics.  It lacks smoothness and grace, and is

too earthy and business-like.  It has the sordid look of a trades-union

procession out on strike.  That is not the right form for it.  The book

does it better; we will fall back on the book and have a cake-walk:



          "It was easy to divine that some restless grief possessed him;

          Mary herself was not unlearned in the lore of pain.  His

          generous zeal in her father's behalf, his spiritual sonship to

          Godwin, his reverence for her mother's memory, were guarantees

          with Mary of his excellence.--[What she was after was

          guarantees of his excellence.  That he stood ready to desert

          his wife and child was one of them, apparently.]--The new

          friends could not lack subjects of discourse, and underneath

          their words about Mary's mother, and 'Political Justice,' and

          'Rights of Woman,' were two young hearts, each feeling towards

          the other, each perhaps unaware, trembling in the direction of

          the other.  The desire to assuage the suffering of one whose

          happiness has grown precious to us may become a hunger of the

          spirit as keen as any other, and this hunger now possessed

          Mary's heart; when her eyes rested unseen on Shelley, it was

          with a look full of the ardor of a 'soothing pity.'"



Yes, that is better and has more composure.  That is just the way it

happened.  He told her about the wet-nurse, she told him about political

justice; he told her about the deadly sister-in-law, she told him about

her mother; he told her about the bonnet-shop, she murmured back about

the rights of woman; then he assuaged her, then she assuaged him; then he

assuaged her some more, next she assuaged him some more; then they both

assuaged one another simultaneously; and so they went on by the hour

assuaging and assuaging and assuaging, until at last what was the result?

They were in love.  It will happen so every time.



          "He had married a woman who, as he now persuaded himself, had

          never truly loved him, who loved only his fortune and his rank,

          and who proved her selfishness by deserting him in his misery."



I think that that is not quite fair to Harriet.  We have no certainty

that she knew Cornelia had turned him out of the house.  He went back to

Cornelia, and Harriet may have supposed that he was as happy with her as

ever.  Still, it was judicious to begin to lay on the whitewash, for

Shelley is going to need many a coat of it now, and the sooner the reader

becomes used to the intrusion of the brush the sooner he will get

reconciled to it and stop fretting about it.



After Shelley's (conjectured) visit to Harriet at Bath--8th of June to

18th--"it seems to have been arranged that Shelley should henceforth

join the Skinner Street household each day at dinner."



Nothing could be handier than this; things will swim along now.



          "Although now Shelley was coming to believe that his wedded

          union with Harriet was a thing of the past, he had not ceased

          to regard her with affectionate consideration; he wrote to her

          frequently, and kept her informed of his whereabouts."



We must not get impatient over these curious inharmoniousnesses and

irreconcilabilities in Shelley's character.  You can see by the

biographer's attitude towards them that there is nothing objectionable

about them.  Shelley was doing his best to make two adoring young

creatures happy: he was regarding the one with affectionate consideration

by mail, and he was assuaging the other one at home.



          "Unhappy Harriet, residing at Bath, had perhaps never desired

          that the breach between herself and her husband should be

          irreparable and complete."



I find no fault with that sentence except that the "perhaps" is not

strictly warranted.  It should have been left out.  In support--or shall

we say extenuation?--of this opinion I submit that there is not

sufficient evidence to warrant the uncertainty which it implies.  The

only "evidence" offered that Harriet was hard and proud and standing out

against a reconciliation is a poem--the poem in which Shelley beseeches

her to "bid the remorseless feeling flee" and "pity" if she "cannot

love."  We have just that as "evidence," and out of its meagre materials

the biographer builds a cobhouse of conjectures as big as the Coliseum;

conjectures which convince him, the prosecuting attorney, but ought to

fall far short of convincing any fair-minded jury.



Shelley's love-poems may be very good evidence, but we know well that

they are "good for this day and train only."  We are able to believe that

they spoke the truth for that one day, but we know by experience that

they could not be depended on to speak it the next.  The very

supplication for a rewarming of Harriet's chilled love was followed so

suddenly by the poet's plunge into an adoring passion for Mary Godwin

that if it had been a check it would have lost its value before a lazy

person could have gotten to the bank with it.



Hardness, stubbornness, pride, vindictiveness--these may sometimes reside

in a young wife and mother of nineteen, but they are not charged against

Harriet Shelley outside of that poem, and one has no right to insert them

into her character on such shadowy "evidence" as that.  Peacock knew

Harriet well, and she has a flexible and persuadable look, as painted by

him:



          "Her manners were good, and her whole aspect and demeanor such

          manifest emanations of pure and truthful nature that to be once

          in her company was to know her thoroughly.  She was fond of her

          husband, and accommodated herself in every way to his tastes.

          If they mixed in society, she adorned it; if they lived in

          retirement, she was satisfied; if they travelled, she enjoyed

          the change of scene."



"Perhaps" she had never desired that the breach should be irreparable and

complete.  The truth is, we do not even know that there was any breach at

all at this time.  We know that the husband and wife went before the

altar and took a new oath on the 24th of March to love and cherish each

other until death--and this may be regarded as a sort of reconciliation

itself, and a wiping out of the old grudges.  Then Harriet went away, and

the sister-in-law removed herself from her society.  That was in April.

Shelley wrote his "appeal" in May, but the corresponding went right along

afterwards.  We have a right to doubt that the subject of it was a

"reconciliation," or that Harriet had any suspicion that she needed to be

reconciled and that her husband was trying to persuade her to it--as the

biographer has sought to make us believe, with his Coliseum of

conjectures built out of a waste-basket of poetry.  For we have

"evidence" now--not poetry and conjecture.  When Shelley had been dining

daily in the Skinner Street paradise fifteen days and continuing the

love-match which was already a fortnight old twenty-five days earlier,

he forgot to write Harriet; forgot it the next day and the next.  During

four days Harriet got no letter from him.  Then her fright and anxiety

rose to expression-heat, and she wrote a letter to Shelley's publisher

which seems to reveal to us that Shelley's letters to her had been the

customary affectionate letters of husband to wife, and had carried no

appeals for reconciliation and had not needed to:



                                   "BATH (postmark July 7, 1814).

          "MY DEAR SIR,--You will greatly oblige me by giving the

          enclosed to Mr.  Shelley.  I would not trouble you, but it is

          now four days since I have heard from him, which to me is an

          age.  Will you write by return of post and tell me what has

          become of him? as I always fancy something dreadful has

          happened if I do not hear from him.  If you tell me that he is

          well I shall not come to London, but if I do not hear from you

          or him I shall certainly come, as I cannot endure this dreadful

          state of suspense.  You are his friend and you can feel for me.

                              "I remain yours truly,

                                                  "H. S."





Even without Peacock's testimony that "her whole aspect and demeanor were

manifest emanations of a pure and truthful nature," we should hold this

to be a truthful letter, a sincere letter, a loving letter; it bears

those marks; I think it is also the letter of a person accustomed to

receiving letters from her husband frequently, and that they have been of

a welcome and satisfactory sort, too, this long time back--ever since the

solemn remarriage and reconciliation at the altar most likely.



The biographer follows Harriet's letter with a conjecture.

He conjectures that she "would now gladly have retraced her steps."

Which means that it is proven that she had steps to retrace--proven by

the poem.  Well, if the poem is better evidence than the letter, we must

let it stand at that.



Then the biographer attacks Harriet Shelley's honor--by authority of

random and unverified gossip scavengered from a group of people whose

very names make a person shudder: Mary Godwin, mistress to Shelley; her

part-sister, discarded mistress of Lord Byron; Godwin, the philosophical

tramp, who gathers his share of it from a shadow--that is to say, from a

person whom he shirks out of naming.  Yet the biographer dignifies this

sorry rubbish with the name of "evidence."



Nothing remotely resembling a distinct charge from a named person

professing to know is offered among this precious "evidence."



1.  "Shelley believed" so and so.



2.  Byron's discarded mistress says that Shelley told Mary Godwin so and

so, and Mary told her.



3.  "Shelley said" so and so--and later "admitted over and over again

that he had been in error."



4.  The unspeakable Godwin "wrote to Mr. Baxter" that he knew so and so

"from unquestionable authority"--name not furnished.



How-any man in his right mind could bring himself to defile the grave of

a shamefully abused and defenceless girl with these baseless

fabrications, this manufactured filth, is inconceivable.  How any man, in

his right mind or out of it, could sit down and coldly try to persuade

anybody to believe it, or listen patiently to it, or, indeed, do anything

but scoff at it and deride it, is astonishing.



The charge insinuated by these odious slanders is one of the most

difficult of all offences to prove; it is also one which no man has a

right to mention even in a whisper about any woman, living or dead,

unless he knows it to be true, and not even then unless he can also prove

it to be true.  There is no justification for the abomination of putting

this stuff in the book.



Against Harriet Shelley's good name there is not one scrap of tarnishing

evidence, and not even a scrap of evil gossip, that comes from a source

that entitles it to a hearing.



On the credit side of the account we have strong opinions from the people

who knew her best.  Peacock says:



          "I feel it due to the memory of Harriet to state my most

          decided conviction that her conduct as a wife was as pure, as

          true, as absolutely faultless, as that of any who for such

          conduct are held most in honor."



Thornton Hunt, who had picked and published slight flaws in Harriet's

character, says, as regards this alleged large one:



          "There is not a trace of evidence or a whisper of scandal

          against her before her voluntary departure from Shelley."



Trelawney says:



          "I was assured by the evidence of the few friends who knew both

          Shelley and his wife--Hookham, Hogg, Peacock, and one of the

          Godwins--that Harriet was perfectly innocent of all offence."



What excuse was there for raking up a parcel of foul rumors from

malicious and discredited sources and flinging them at this dead girl's

head?  Her very defencelessness should have been her protection.  The

fact that all letters to her or about her, with almost every scrap of her

own writing, had been diligently mislaid, leaving her case destitute of a

voice, while every pen-stroke which could help her husband's side had

been as diligently preserved, should have excused her from being brought

to trial.  Her witnesses have all disappeared, yet we see her summoned in

her grave-clothes to plead for the life of her character, without the

help of an advocate, before a disqualified judge and a packed jury.



Harriet Shelley wrote her distressed letter on the 7th of July.  On the

28th her husband ran away with Mary Godwin and her part-sister Claire to

the Continent.  He deserted his wife when her confinement was

approaching.  She bore him a child at the end of November, his mistress

bore him another one something over two months later.  The truants were

back in London before either of these events occurred.



On one occasion, presently, Shelley was so pressed for money to support

his mistress with that he went to his wife and got some money of his that

was in her hands--twenty pounds.  Yet the mistress was not moved to

gratitude; for later, when the wife was troubled to meet her engagements,

the mistress makes this entry in her diary:



          "Harriet sends her creditors here; nasty woman.  Now we shall

          have to change our lodgings."



The deserted wife bore the bitterness and obloquy of her situation two

years and a quarter; then she gave up, and drowned herself.  A month

afterwards the body was found in the water.  Three weeks later Shelley

married his mistress.



I must here be allowed to italicize a remark of the biographer's

concerning Harriet Shelley:



          "That no act of Shelley's during the two years which

          immediately preceded her death tended to cause the rash act

          which brought her life to its close seems certain."



Yet her husband had deserted her and her children, and was living with a

concubine all that time!  Why should a person attempt to write biography

when the simplest facts have no meaning to him?  This book is littered

with as crass stupidities as that one--deductions by the page which bear

no discoverable kinship to their premises.



The biographer throws off that extraordinary remark without any

perceptible disturbance to his serenity; for he follows it with a

sentimental justification of Shelley's conduct which has not a pang of

conscience in it, but is silky and smooth and undulating and pious--

a cake-walk with all the colored brethren at their best.  There may be

people who can read that page and keep their temper, but it is doubtful.

Shelley's life has the one indelible blot upon it, but is otherwise

worshipfully noble and beautiful.  It even stands out indestructibly

gracious and lovely from the ruck of these disastrous pages, in spite of

the fact that they expose and establish his responsibility for his

forsaken wife's pitiful fate--a responsibility which he himself tacitly

admits in a letter to Eliza Westbrook, wherein he refers to his taking up

with Mary Godwin as an act which Eliza "might excusably regard as the

cause of her sister's ruin."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of In Defense of Harriet Shelley

by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













FENIMORE COOPER'S LITERARY OFFENCES



by Mark Twain







          The Pathfinder and The Deerslayer stand at the head of Cooper's

          novels as artistic creations.  There are others of his works

          which contain parts as perfect as are to be found in these, and

          scenes even more thrilling.  Not one can be compared with

          either of them as a finished whole.



          The defects in both of these tales are comparatively slight.

          They were pure works of art.--Prof. Lounsbury.





          The five tales reveal an extraordinary fulness of invention.

          .  .  .  One of the very greatest characters in fiction, Natty

          Bumppo .  .  .  .



          The craft of the woodsman, the tricks of the trapper, all the

          delicate art of the forest, were familiar to Cooper from his

          youth up.--Prof. Brander Matthews.



          Cooper is the greatest artist in the domain of romantic fiction

          yet produced by America.--Wilkie Collins.





It seems to me that it was far from right for the Professor of English

Literature in Yale, the Professor of English Literature in Columbia, and

Wilkie Collies to deliver opinions on Cooper's literature without having

read some of it.  It would have been much more decorous to keep silent

and let persons talk who have read Cooper.



Cooper's art has some defects.  In one place in 'Deerslayer,' and in the

restricted space of two-thirds of a page, Cooper has scored 114 offences

against literary art out of a possible 115.  It breaks the record.



There are nineteen rules governing literary art in the domain of romantic

fiction--some say twenty-two.  In Deerslayer Cooper violated eighteen of

them.  These eighteen require:



1.  That a tale shall accomplish something and arrive somewhere.  But the

Deerslayer tale accomplishes nothing and arrives in the air.



2.  They require that the episodes of a tale shall be necessary parts of

the tale, and shall help to develop it.  But as the Deerslayer tale is

not a tale, and accomplishes nothing and arrives nowhere, the episodes

have no rightful place in the work, since there was nothing for them to

develop.



3.  They require that the personages in a tale shall be alive, except in

the case of corpses, and that always the reader shall be able to tell the

corpses from the others.  But this detail has often been overlooked in

the Deerslayer tale.



4.  They require that the personages in a tale, both dead and alive,

shall exhibit a sufficient excuse for being there.  But this detail also

has been overlooked in the Deerslayer tale.



5.  They require that when the personages of a tale deal in conversation,

the talk shall sound like human talk, and be talk such as human beings

would be likely to talk in the given circumstances, and have a

discoverable meaning, also a discoverable purpose, and a show of

relevancy, and remain in the neighborhood of the subject in hand, and be

interesting to the reader, and help out the tale, and stop when the

people cannot think of anything more to say.  But this requirement has

been ignored from the beginning of the Deerslayer tale to the end of it.



6.  They require that when the author describes the character of a

personage in his tale, the conduct and conversation of that personage

shall justify said description.  But this law gets little or no attention

in the Deerslayer tale, as Natty Bumppo's case will amply prove.



7.  They require that when a personage talks like an illustrated,

gilt-edged, tree-calf, hand-tooled, seven-dollar Friendship's Offering

in the beginning of a paragraph, he shall not talk like a negro minstrel

in the end of it.  But this rule is flung down and danced upon in the

Deerslayer tale.



8.  They require that crass stupidities shall not be played upon the

reader as "the craft of the woodsman, the delicate art of the forest," by

either the author or the people in the tale.  But this rule is

persistently violated in the Deerslayer tale.



9.  They require that the personages of a tale shall confine themselves

to possibilities and let miracles alone; or, if they venture a miracle,

the author must so plausibly set it forth as to make it look possible and

reasonable.  But these rules are not respected in the Deerslayer tale.



10.  They require that the author shall make the reader feel a deep

interest in the personages of his tale and in their fate; and that he

shall make the reader love the good people in the tale and hate the bad

ones.  But the reader of the Deerslayer tale dislikes the good people in

it, is indifferent to the others, and wishes they would all get drowned

together.



11.  They require that the characters in a tale shall be so clearly

defined that the reader can tell beforehand what each will do in a given

emergency.  But in the Deerslayer tale this rule is vacated.



In addition to these large rules there are some little ones.  These

require that the author shall:



12.  Say what he is proposing to say, not merely come near it.



13.  Use the right word, not its second cousin.



14.  Eschew surplusage.



15.  Not omit necessary details.



16.  Avoid slovenliness of form.



17.  Use good grammar.



18.  Employ a simple and straightforward style.



Even these seven are coldly and persistently violated in the Deerslayer

tale.



Cooper's gift in the way of invention was not a rich endowment; but such

as it was he liked to work it, he was pleased with the effects, and

indeed he did some quite sweet things with it.  In his little box of

stage properties he kept six or eight cunning devices, tricks, artifices

for his savages and woodsmen to deceive and circumvent each other with,

and he was never so happy as when he was working these innocent things

and seeing them go.  A favorite one was to make a moccasined person tread

in the tracks of the moccasined enemy, and thus hide his own trail.

Cooper wore out barrels and barrels of moccasins in working that trick.

Another stage-property that he pulled out of his box pretty frequently

was his broken twig.  He prized his broken twig above all the rest of his

effects, and worked it the hardest.  It is a restful chapter in any book

of his when somebody doesn't step on a dry twig and alarm all the reds

and whites for two hundred yards around.  Every time a Cooper person is

in peril, and absolute silence is worth four dollars a minute, he is sure

to step on a dry twig.  There may be a hundred handier things to step on,

but that wouldn't satisfy Cooper.  Cooper requires him to turn out and

find a dry twig; and if he can't do it, go and borrow one.  In fact, the

Leather Stocking Series ought to have been called the Broken Twig Series.



I am sorry there is not room to put in a few dozen instances of the

delicate art of the forest, as practised by Natty Bumppo and some of the

other Cooperian experts.  Perhaps we may venture two or three samples.

Cooper was a sailor--a naval officer; yet he gravely tells us how a

vessel, driving towards a lee shore in a gale, is steered for a

particular spot by her skipper because he knows of an undertow there

which will hold her back against the gale and save her.  For just pure

woodcraft, or sailorcraft, or whatever it is, isn't that neat?  For

several years Cooper was daily in the society of artillery, and he ought

to have noticed that when a cannon-ball strikes the ground it either

buries itself or skips a hundred feet or so; skips again a hundred feet

or so--and so on, till finally it gets tired and rolls.  Now in one place

he loses some "females"--as he always calls women--in the edge of a wood

near a plain at night in a fog, on purpose to give Bumppo a chance to

show off the delicate art of the forest before the reader.  These mislaid

people are hunting for a fort.  They hear a cannonblast, and a

cannon-ball presently comes rolling into the wood and stops at their

feet.  To the females this suggests nothing.  The case is very different

with the admirable Bumppo.  I wish I may never know peace again if he

doesn't strike out promptly and follow the track of that cannon-ball

across the plain through the dense fog and find the fort.  Isn't it a

daisy?  If Cooper had any real knowledge of Nature's ways of doing

things, he had a most delicate art in concealing the fact.  For

instance: one of his acute Indian experts, Chingachgook (pronounced

Chicago, I think), has lost the trail of a person he is tracking through

the forest.  Apparently that trail is hopelessly lost.  Neither you nor

I could ever have guessed out the way to find it.  It was very different

with Chicago.  Chicago was not stumped for long.  He turned a running

stream out of its course, and there, in the slush in its old bed, were

that person's moccasin-tracks. The current did not wash them away, as it

would have done in all other like cases--no, even the eternal laws of

Nature have to vacate when Cooper wants to put up a delicate job of

woodcraft on the reader.



We must be a little wary when Brander Matthews tells us that Cooper's

books "reveal an extraordinary fulness of invention."  As a rule, I am

quite willing to accept Brander Matthews's literary judgments and applaud

his lucid and graceful phrasing of them; but that particular statement

needs to be taken with a few tons of salt.  Bless your heart, Cooper

hadn't any more invention than a horse; and I don't mean a high-class

horse, either; I mean a clothes-horse.  It would be very difficult to

find a really clever "situation" in Cooper's books, and still more

difficult to find one of any kind which he has failed to render absurd by

his handling of it.  Look at the episodes of "the caves"; and at the

celebrated scuffle between Maqua and those others on the table-land a few

days later; and at Hurry Harry's queer water-transit from the castle to

the ark; and at Deerslayer's half-hour with his first corpse; and at the

quarrel between Hurry Harry and Deerslayer later; and at--but choose for

yourself; you can't go amiss.



If Cooper had been an observer his inventive faculty would have worked

better; not more interestingly, but more rationally, more plausibly.

Cooper's proudest creations in the way of "situations" suffer noticeably

from the absence of the observer's protecting gift.  Cooper's eye was

splendidly inaccurate.  Cooper seldom saw anything correctly.  He saw

nearly all things as through a glass eye, darkly.  Of course a man who

cannot see the commonest little every-day matters accurately is working

at a disadvantage when he is constructing a "situation."  In the

Deerslayer tale Cooper has a stream which is fifty feet wide where it

flows out of a lake; it presently narrows to twenty as it meanders along

for no given reason; and yet when a stream acts like that it ought to be

required to explain itself.  Fourteen pages later the width of the

brook's outlet from the lake has suddenly shrunk thirty feet, and become

"the narrowest part of the stream." This shrinkage is not accounted for.

The stream has bends in it, a sure indication that it has alluvial banks

and cuts them; yet these bends are only thirty and fifty feet long.  If

Cooper had been a nice and punctilious observer he would have noticed

that the bends were oftener nine hundred feet long than short of it.



Cooper made the exit of that stream fifty feet wide, in the first place,

for no particular reason; in the second place, he narrowed it to less

than twenty to accommodate some Indians.  He bends a "sapling" to the

form of an arch over this narrow passage, and conceals six Indians in its

foliage.  They are "laying" for a settler's scow or ark which is coming

up the stream on its way to the lake; it is being hauled against the

stiff current by a rope whose stationary end is anchored in the lake; its

rate of progress cannot be more than a mile an hour.  Cooper describes

the ark, but pretty obscurely.  In the matter of dimensions "it was

little more than a modern canal-boat." Let us guess, then, that it was

about one hundred and forty feet long.  It was of "greater breadth than

common."  Let us guess, then, that it was about sixteen feet wide.  This

leviathan had been prowling down bends which were but a third as long as

itself, and scraping between banks where it had only two feet of space

to spare on each side.  We cannot too much admire this miracle.

A low-roofed log dwelling occupies "two-thirds of the ark's length"--a

dwelling ninety feet long and sixteen feet wide, let us say a kind of

vestibule train.  The dwelling has two rooms--each forty-five feet long

and sixteen feet wide, let us guess.  One of them is the bedroom of the

Hutter girls, Judith and Hetty; the other is the parlor in the daytime,

at night it is papa's bedchamber.  The ark is arriving at the stream's

exit now, whose width has been reduced to less than twenty feet to

accommodate the Indians--say to eighteen.  There is a foot to spare on

each side of the boat.  Did the Indians notice that there was going to

be a tight squeeze there?  Did they notice that they could make money by

climbing down out of that arched sapling and just stepping aboard when

the ark scraped by? No, other Indians would have noticed these things,

but Cooper's Indians never notice anything.  Cooper thinks they are

marvelous creatures for noticing, but he was almost always in error

about his Indians.  There was seldom a sane one among them.



The ark is one hundred and forty feet long; the dwelling is ninety feet

long.  The idea of the Indians is to drop softly and secretly from the

arched sapling to the dwelling as the ark creeps along under it at the

rate of a mile an hour, and butcher the family.  It will take the ark a

minute and a half to pass under.  It will take the ninety foot dwelling a

minute to pass under.  Now, then, what did the six Indians do?  It would

take you thirty years to guess, and even then you would have to give it

up, I believe.  Therefore, I will tell you what the Indians did.  Their

chief, a person of quite extraordinary intellect for a Cooper Indian,

warily watched the canal-boat as it squeezed along under him, and when he

had got his calculations fined down to exactly the right shade, as he

judged, he let go and dropped.  And missed the house!  That is actually

what he did.  He missed the house, and landed in the stern of the scow.

It was not much of a fall, yet it knocked him silly.  He lay there

unconscious.  If the house had been ninety-seven feet long he would have

made the trip.  The fault was Cooper's, not his.  The error lay in the

construction of the house.  Cooper was no architect.



There still remained in the roost five Indians.



The boat has passed under and is now out of their reach.  Let me explain

what the five did--you would not be able to reason it out for yourself.

No. 1 jumped for the boat, but fell in the water astern of it.  Then No.

2 jumped for the boat, but fell in the water still farther astern of it.

Then No. 3 jumped for the boat, and fell a good way astern of it.  Then

No, 4.  jumped for the boat, and fell in the water away astern.  Then

even No. 5 made a jump for the boat--for he was a Cooper Indian.  In the

matter of intellect, the difference between a Cooper Indian and the

Indian that stands in front of the cigarshop is not spacious.  The scow

episode is really a sublime burst of invention; but it does not thrill,

because the inaccuracy of the details throws a sort of air of

fictitiousness and general improbability over it.  This comes of Cooper's

inadequacy as an observer.



The reader will find some examples of Cooper's high talent for inaccurate

observation in the account of the shooting-match in The Pathfinder.



          "A common wrought nail was driven lightly into the target, its

          head having been first touched with paint."



The color of the paint is not stated--an important omission, but Cooper

deals freely in important omissions.  No, after all, it was not an

important omission; for this nail-head is a hundred yards from the

marksmen, and could not be seen by them at that distance, no matter what

its color might be.



How far can the best eyes see a common house-fly?  A hundred yards?  It

is quite impossible.  Very well; eyes that cannot see a house-fly that is

a hundred yards away cannot see an ordinary nailhead at that distance,

for the size of the two objects is the same.  It takes a keen eye to see

a fly or a nailhead at fifty yards--one hundred and fifty feet.  Can the

reader do it?



The nail was lightly driven, its head painted, and game called.  Then the

Cooper miracles began.  The bullet of the first marksman chipped an edge

off the nail-head; the next man's bullet drove the nail a little way into

the target--and removed all the paint.  Haven't the miracles gone far

enough now?  Not to suit Cooper; for the purpose of this whole scheme is

to show off his prodigy, Deerslayer Hawkeye--Long-Rifle-Leather-Stocking-

Pathfinder-Bumppo before the ladies.



          "'Be all ready to clench it, boys I' cried out Pathfinder,

          stepping into his friend's tracks the instant they were vacant.

          'Never mind a new nail; I can see that, though the paint is

          gone, and what I can see I can hit at a hundred yards, though

          it were only a mosquito's eye.  Be ready to clench!'



"The rifle cracked, the bullet sped its way, and the head of the nail was

buried in the wood, covered by the piece of flattened lead."



There, you see, is a man who could hunt flies with a rifle, and command a

ducal salary in a Wild West show to-day if we had him back with us.



The recorded feat is certainly surprising just as it stands; but it is

not surprising enough for Cooper.  Cooper adds a touch.  He has made

Pathfinder do this miracle with another man's rifle; and not only that,

but Pathfinder did not have even the advantage of loading it himself.  He

had everything against him, and yet he made that impossible shot; and not

only made it, but did it with absolute confidence, saying, "Be ready to

clench."  Now a person like that would have undertaken that same feat

with a brickbat, and with Cooper to help he would have achieved it, too.



Pathfinder showed off handsomely that day before the ladies.  His very

first feat was a thing which no Wild West show can touch.  He was

standing with the group of marksmen, observing--a hundred yards from the

target, mind; one jasper raised his rifle and drove the centre of the

bull's-eye.  Then the Quartermaster fired.  The target exhibited no

result this time.  There was a laugh.  "It's a dead miss," said Major

Lundie.  Pathfinder waited an impressive moment or two; then said, in

that calm, indifferent, know-it-all way of his, "No, Major, he has

covered jasper's bullet, as will be seen if any one will take the trouble

to examine the target."



Wasn't it remarkable!  How could he see that little pellet fly through

the air and enter that distant bullet-hole?  Yet that is what he did; for

nothing is impossible to a Cooper person.  Did any of those people have

any deep-seated doubts about this thing?  No; for that would imply

sanity, and these were all Cooper people.



          "The respect for Pathfinder's skill and for his 'quickness and

          accuracy of sight'" (the italics [''] are mine) "was so

          profound and general, that the instant he made this declaration

          the spectators began to distrust their own opinions, and a

          dozen rushed to the target in order to ascertain the fact.

          There, sure enough, it was found that the Quartermaster's

          bullet had gone through the hole made by Jasper's, and that,

          too, so accurately as to require a minute examination to be

          certain of the circumstance, which, however, was soon clearly

          established by discovering one bullet over the other in the

          stump against which the target was placed."



They made a "minute" examination; but never mind, how could they know

that there were two bullets in that hole without digging the latest one

out?  for neither probe nor eyesight could prove the presence of any more

than one bullet.  Did they dig?  No; as we shall see.  It is the

Pathfinder's turn now; he steps out before the ladies, takes aim, and

fires.



But, alas! here is a disappointment; an incredible, an unimaginable

disappointment--for the target's aspect is unchanged; there is nothing

there but that same old bullet-hole!



          "'If one dared to hint at such a thing,' cried Major Duncan, 'I

          should say that the Pathfinder has also missed the target!'"



As nobody had missed it yet, the "also" was not necessary; but never mind

about that, for the Pathfinder is going to speak.



          "'No, no, Major,' said he, confidently, 'that would be a risky

          declaration.  I didn't load the piece, and can't say what was

          in it; but if it was lead, you will find the bullet driving

          down those of the Quartermaster and Jasper, else is not my name

          Pathfinder.'



          "A shout from the target announced the truth of this

          assertion."



Is the miracle sufficient as it stands?  Not for Cooper.  The Pathfinder

speaks again, as he "now slowly advances towards the stage occupied by

the females":



          "'That's not all, boys, that's not all; if you find the target

          touched at all, I'll own to a miss.  The Quartermaster cut the

          wood, but you'll find no wood cut by that last messenger."



The miracle is at last complete.  He knew--doubtless saw--at the distance

of a hundred yards--that his bullet had passed into the hole without

fraying the edges.  There were now three bullets in that one hole--three

bullets embedded processionally in the body of the stump back of the

target.  Everybody knew this--somehow or other--and yet nobody had dug

any of them out to make sure.  Cooper is not a close observer, but he is

interesting.  He is certainly always that, no matter what happens.  And

he is more interesting when he is not noticing what he is about than when

he is.  This is a considerable merit.



The conversations in the Cooper books have a curious sound in our modern

ears.  To believe that such talk really ever came out of people's mouths

would be to believe that there was a time when time was of no value to a

person who thought he had something to say; when it was the custom to

spread a two-minute remark out to ten; when a man's mouth was a

rolling-mill, and busied itself all day long in turning four-foot pigs

of thought into thirty-foot bars of conversational railroad iron by

attenuation; when subjects were seldom faithfully stuck to, but the talk

wandered all around and arrived nowhere; when conversations consisted

mainly of irrelevancies, with here and there a relevancy, a relevancy

with an embarrassed look, as not being able to explain how it got there.



Cooper was certainly not a master in the construction of dialogue.

Inaccurate observation defeated him here as it defeated him in so many

other enterprises of his.  He even failed to notice that the man who

talks corrupt English six days in the week must and will talk it on the

seventh, and can't help himself.  In the Deerslayer story he lets

Deerslayer talk the showiest kind of book-talk sometimes, and at other

times the basest of base dialects.  For instance, when some one asks him

if he has a sweetheart, and if so, where she abides, this is his majestic

answer:



          "'She's in the forest-hanging from the boughs of the trees, in

          a soft rain--in the dew on the open grass--the clouds that

          float about in the blue heavens--the birds that sing in the

          woods--the sweet springs where I slake my thirst--and in all

          the other glorious gifts that come from God's Providence!'"



And he preceded that, a little before, with this:



          "'It consarns me as all things that touches a fri'nd consarns a

          fri'nd.'"



And this is another of his remarks:



          "'If I was Injin born, now, I might tell of this, or carry in

          the scalp and boast of the expl'ite afore the whole tribe; or

          if my inimy had only been a bear'"--and so on.



We cannot imagine such a thing as a veteran Scotch Commander-in-Chief

comporting himself in the field like a windy melodramatic actor, but

Cooper could.  On one occasion Alice and Cora were being chased by the

French through a fog in the neighborhood of their father's fort:



          "'Point de quartier aux coquins!' cried an eager pursuer, who

          seemed to direct the operations of the enemy.



          "'Stand firm and be ready, my gallant Goths!' suddenly

          exclaimed a voice above them; wait to see the enemy; fire low,

          and sweep the glacis.'



          "'Father? father!' exclaimed a piercing cry from out the mist;

          it is I!  Alice! thy own Elsie! spare, O! save your daughters!'



          "'Hold!' shouted the former speaker, in the awful tones of

          parental agony, the sound reaching even to the woods, and

          rolling back in solemn echo.  ''Tis she! God has restored me my

          children! Throw open the sally-port; to the field, Goths, to

          the field! pull not a trigger, lest ye kill my lambs!  Drive

          off these dogs of France with your steel!'"



Cooper's word-sense was singularly dull.  When a person has a poor ear

for music he will flat and sharp right along without knowing it.  He

keeps near the tune, but it is not the tune.  When a person has a poor

ear for words, the result is a literary flatting and sharping; you

perceive what he is intending to say, but you also perceive that he

doesn't say it.  This is Cooper.  He was not a word-musician.  His ear

was satisfied with the approximate word.  I will furnish some

circumstantial evidence in support of this charge.  My instances are

gathered from half a dozen pages of the tale called Deerslayer.  He uses

"verbal," for "oral"; "precision," for "facility"; "phenomena," for

"marvels"; "necessary," for "predetermined"; "unsophisticated," for

"primitive"; "preparation," for "expectancy"; "rebuked," for "subdued";

"dependent on," for "resulting from"; "fact," for "condition"; "fact,"

for "conjecture"; "precaution," for "caution"; "explain," for

"determine"; "mortified," for "disappointed"; "meretricious," for

"factitious"; "materially," for "considerably"; "decreasing," for

"deepening"; "increasing," for "disappearing"; "embedded," for

"enclosed"; "treacherous;" for "hostile"; "stood," for "stooped";

"softened," for "replaced"; "rejoined," for "remarked"; "situation," for

"condition"; "different," for "differing"; "insensible," for

"unsentient"; "brevity," for "celerity"; "distrusted," for "suspicious";

"mental imbecility," for "imbecility"; "eyes," for "sight";

"counteracting," for "opposing"; "funeral obsequies," for "obsequies."



There have been daring people in the world who claimed that Cooper could

write English, but they are all dead now--all dead but Lounsbury.

I don't remember that Lounsbury makes the claim in so many words, still

he makes it, for he says that Deerslayer is a "pure work of art."

Pure, in that connection, means faultless--faultless in all details and

language is a detail.  If Mr. Lounsbury had only compared Cooper's

English with the English which he writes himself--but it is plain that he

didn't; and so it is likely that he imagines until this day that Cooper's

is as clean and compact as his own.  Now I feel sure, deep down in my

heart, that Cooper wrote about the poorest English that exists in our

language, and that the English of Deerslayer is the very worst that even

Cooper ever wrote.



I may be mistaken, but it does seem to me that Deerslayer is not a work

of art in any sense; it does seem to me that it is destitute of every

detail that goes to the making of a work of art; in truth, it seems to me

that Deerslayer is just simply a literary delirium tremens.



A work of art?  It has no invention; it has no order, system, sequence,

or result; it has no lifelikeness, no thrill, no stir, no seeming of

reality; its characters are confusedly drawn, and by their acts and words

they prove that they are not the sort of people the author claims that

they are; its humor is pathetic; its pathos is funny; its conversations

are--oh! indescribable; its love-scenes odious; its English a crime

against the language.



Counting these out, what is left is Art.  I think we must all admit that.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fennimore Cooper's Literary Offences

by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













ESSAYS ON PAUL BOURGET



by Mark Twain







CONTENTS:

     WHAT PAUL BOURGET THINKS OF US

     A LITTLE NOTE TO M. PAUL BOURGET









WHAT PAUL BOURGET THINKS OF US



He reports the American joke correctly.  In Boston they ask, How much

does he know? in New York, How much is he worth? in Philadelphia, Who

were his parents?  And when an alien observer turns his telescope upon

us--advertisedly in our own special interest--a natural apprehension

moves us to ask, What is the diameter of his reflector?



I take a great interest in M. Bourget's chapters, for I know by the

newspapers that there are several Americans who are expecting to get a

whole education out of them; several who foresaw, and also foretold, that

our long night was over, and a light almost divine about to break upon

the land.



          "His utterances concerning us are bound to be weighty and well

          timed."



          "He gives us an object-lesson which should be thoughtfully and

          profitably studied."



These well-considered and important verdicts were of a nature to restore

public confidence, which had been disquieted by questionings as to

whether so young a teacher would be qualified to take so large a class as

70,000,000, distributed over so extensive a schoolhouse as America, and

pull it through without assistance.



I was even disquieted myself, although I am of a cold, calm temperament,

and not easily disturbed.  I feared for my country.  And I was not wholly

tranquilized by the verdicts rendered as above.  It seemed to me that

there was still room for doubt.  In fact, in looking the ground over I

became more disturbed than I was before.  Many worrying questions came up

in my mind.  Two were prominent.  Where had the teacher gotten his

equipment?  What was his method?



He had gotten his equipment in France.



Then as to his method!  I saw by his own intimations that he was an

Observer, and had a System that used by naturalists and other scientists.

The naturalist collects many bugs and reptiles and butterflies and

studies their ways a long time patiently.  By this means he is presently

able to group these creatures into families and subdivisions of families

by nice shadings of differences observable in their characters.  Then he

labels all those shaded bugs and things with nicely descriptive group

names, and is now happy, for his great work is completed, and as a result

he intimately knows every bug and shade of a bug there, inside and out.

It may be true, but a person who was not a naturalist would feel safer

about it if he had the opinion of the bug.  I think it is a pleasant

System, but subject to error.



The Observer of Peoples has to be a Classifier, a Grouper, a Deducer, a

Generalizer, a Psychologizer; and, first and last, a Thinker.  He has to

be all these, and when he is at home, observing his own folk, he is often

able to prove competency.  But history has shown that when he is abroad

observing unfamiliar peoples the chances are heavily against him.  He is

then a naturalist observing a bug, with no more than a naturalist's

chance of being able to tell the bug anything new about itself, and no

more than a naturalist's chance of being able to teach it any new ways

which it will prefer to its own.



To return to that first question.  M. Bourget, as teacher, would simply

be France teaching America.  It seemed to me that the outlook was dark

--almost Egyptian, in fact.  What would the new teacher, representing

France, teach us?  Railroading?  No.  France knows nothing valuable about

railroading.  Steamshipping?  No.  France has no superiorities over us in

that matter.  Steamboating?  No.  French steamboating is still of

Fulton's date--1809.  Postal service?  No.  France is a back number

there.  Telegraphy?  No, we taught her that ourselves.  Journalism?  No.

Magazining?  No, that is our own specialty.  Government?  No; Liberty,

Equality, Fraternity, Nobility, Democracy, Adultery the system is too

variegated for our climate.  Religion?  No, not variegated enough for our

climate.  Morals?  No, we cannot rob the poor to enrich ourselves.

Novel-writing?  No.  M. Bourget and the others know only one plan, and

when that is expurgated there is nothing left of the book.



I wish I could think what he is going to teach us.  Can it be Deportment?

But he experimented in that at Newport and failed to give satisfaction,

except to a few.  Those few are pleased.  They are enjoying their joy as

well as they can.  They confess their happiness to the interviewer.  They

feel pretty striped, but they remember with reverent recognition that

they had sugar between the cuts.  True, sugar with sand in it, but sugar.

And true, they had some trouble to tell which was sugar and which was

sand, because the sugar itself looked just like the sand, and also had a

gravelly taste; still, they knew that the sugar was there, and would have

been very good sugar indeed if it had been screened.  Yes, they are

pleased; not noisily so, but pleased; invaded, or streaked, as one may

say, with little recurrent shivers of joy--subdued joy, so to speak, not

the overdone kind.  And they commune together, these, and massage each

other with comforting sayings, in a sweet spirit of resignation and

thankfulness, mixing these elements in the same proportions as the sugar

and the sand, as a memorial, and saying, the one to the other, and to the

interviewer: "It was severe--yes, it was bitterly severe; but oh, how

true it was; and it will do us so much good!"



If it isn't Deportment, what is left?  It was at this point that I seemed

to get on the right track at last.  M. Bourget would teach us to know

ourselves; that was it: he would reveal us to ourselves.  That would be

an education.  He would explain us to ourselves.  Then we should

understand ourselves; and after that be able to go on more intelligently.



It seemed a doubtful scheme.  He could explain us to himself--that would

be easy.  That would be the same as the naturalist explaining the bug to

himself.  But to explain the bug to the bug--that is quite a different

matter.  The bug may not know himself perfectly, but he knows himself

better than the naturalist can know him, at any rate.



A foreigner can photograph the exteriors of a nation, but I think that

that is as far as he can get.  I think that no foreigner can report its

interior--its soul, its life, its speech, its thought.  I think that a

knowledge of these things is acquirable in only one way; not two or four

or six--absorption; years and years of unconscious absorption; years and

years of intercourse with the life concerned; of living it, indeed;

sharing personally in its shames and prides, its joys and griefs, its

loves and hates, its prosperities and reverses, its shows and

shabbinesses, its deep patriotisms, its whirlwinds of political passion,

its adorations--of flag, and heroic dead, and the glory of the national

name.  Observation?  Of what real value is it?  One learns peoples

through the heart, not the eyes or the intellect.



There is only one expert who is qualified to examine the souls and the

life of a people and make a valuable report--the native novelist.  This

expert is so rare that the most populous country can never have fifteen

conspicuously and confessedly competent ones in stock at one time.  This

native specialist is not qualified to begin work until he has been

absorbing during twenty-five years.  How much of his competency is

derived from conscious "observation"?  The amount is so slight that it

counts for next to nothing in the equipment.  Almost the whole capital

of the novelist is the slow accumulation of unconscious observation

--absorption.  The native expert's intentional observation of manners,

speech, character, and ways of life can have value, for the native knows

what they mean without having to cipher out the meaning.  But I should be

astonished to see a foreigner get at the right meanings, catch the

elusive shades of these subtle things.  Even the native novelist becomes

a foreigner, with a foreigner's limitations, when he steps from the State

whose life is familiar to him into a State whose life he has not lived.

Bret Harte got his California and his Californians by unconscious

absorption, and put both of them into his tales alive.  But when he came

from the Pacific to the Atlantic and tried to do Newport life from

study-conscious observation--his failure was absolutely monumental.

Newport is a disastrous place for the unacclimated observer, evidently.



To return to novel-building.  Does the native novelist try to generalize

the nation?  No, he lays plainly before you the ways and speech and life

of a few people grouped in a certain place--his own place--and that is

one book.  In time he and his brethren will report to you the life and

the people of the whole nation--the life of a group in a New England

village; in a New York village; in a Texan village; in an Oregon village;

in villages in fifty States and Territories; then the farm-life in fifty

States and Territories; a hundred patches of life and groups of people in

a dozen widely separated cities.  And the Indians will be attended to;

and the cowboys; and the gold and silver miners; and the negroes; and the

Idiots and Congressmen; and the Irish, the Germans, the Italians, the

Swedes, the French, the Chinamen, the Greasers; and the Catholics, the

Methodists, the Presbyterians, the Congregationalists, the Baptists, the

Spiritualists, the Mormons, the Shakers, the Quakers, the Jews, the

Campbellites, the infidels, the Christian Scientists, the Mind-Curists,

the Faith-Curists, the train-robbers, the White Caps, the Moonshiners.

And when a thousand able novels have been written, there you have the

soul of the people, the life of the people, the speech of the people; and

not anywhere else can these be had.  And the shadings of character,

manners, feelings, ambitions, will be infinite.



          "'The nature of a people' is always of a similar shade in its

          vices and its virtues, in its frivolities and in its labor.

          'It is this physiognomy which it is necessary to discover',

          and every document is good, from the hall of a casino to the

          church, from the foibles of a fashionable woman to the

          suggestions of a revolutionary leader.  I am therefore quite

          sure that this 'American soul', the principal interest and the

          great object of my voyage, appears behind the records of

          Newport for those who choose to see it."--M. Paul Bourget.



[The italics ('') are mine.]  It is a large contract which he has

undertaken.  "Records" is a pretty poor word there, but I think the use

of it is due to hasty translation.  In the original the word is 'fastes'.

I think M. Bourget meant to suggest that he expected to find the great

"American soul" secreted behind the ostentatious of Newport; and that he

was going to get it out and examine it, and generalize it, and

psychologize it, and make it reveal to him its hidden vast mystery: "the

nature of the people" of the United States of America.  We have been

accused of being a nation addicted to inventing wild schemes.  I trust

that we shall be allowed to retire to second place now.



There isn't a single human characteristic that can be safely labeled

"American."  There isn't a single human ambition, or religious trend,

or drift of thought, or peculiarity of education, or code of principles,

or breed of folly, or style of conversation, or preference for a

particular subject for discussion, or form of legs or trunk or head or

face or expression or complexion, or gait, or dress, or manners, or

disposition, or any other human detail, inside or outside, that can

rationally be generalized as "American."



Whenever you have found what seems to be an "American" peculiarity, you

have only to cross a frontier or two, or go down or up in the social

scale, and you perceive that it has disappeared.  And you can cross the

Atlantic and find it again.  There may be a Newport religious drift, or

sporting drift, or conversational style or complexion, or cut of face,

but there are entire empires in America, north, south, east, and west,

where you could not find your duplicates.  It is the same with everything

else which one might propose to call "American."  M. Bourget thinks he

has found the American Coquette.  If he had really found her he would

also have found, I am sure, that she was not new, that she exists in

other lands in the same forms, and with the same frivolous heart and the

same ways and impulses.  I think this because I have seen our coquette;

I have seen her in life; better still, I have seen her in our novels,

and seen her twin in foreign novels.  I wish M. Bourget had seen ours.

He thought he saw her.  And so he applied his System to her.  She was a

Species.  So he gathered a number of samples of what seemed to be her,

and put them under his glass, and divided them into groups which he calls

"types," and labeled them in his usual scientific way with "formulas"

--brief sharp descriptive flashes that make a person blink, sometimes,

they are so sudden and vivid.  As a rule they are pretty far-fetched,

but that is not an important matter; they surprise, they compel

admiration, and I notice by some of the comments which his efforts have

called forth that they deceive the unwary.  Here are a few of the

coquette variants which he has grouped and labeled:



     THE COLLECTOR.

     THE EQUILIBREE.

     THE PROFESSIONAL BEAUTY.

     THE BLUFFER.

     THE GIRL-BOY.



If he had stopped with describing these characters we should have been

obliged to believe that they exist; that they exist, and that he has seen

them and spoken with them.  But he did not stop there; he went further

and furnished to us light-throwing samples of their behavior, and also

light-throwing samples of their speeches.  He entered those things in his

note-book without suspicion, he takes them out and delivers them to the

world with a candor and simplicity which show that he believed them

genuine.  They throw altogether too much light.  They reveal to the

native the origin of his find.  I suppose he knows how he came to make

that novel and captivating discovery, by this time.  If he does not, any

American can tell him--any American to whom he will show his anecdotes.

It was "put up" on him, as we say.  It was a jest--to be plain, it was a

series of frauds.  To my mind it was a poor sort of jest, witless and

contemptible.  The players of it have their reward, such as it is; they

have exhibited the fact that whatever they may be they are not ladies.

M. Bourget did not discover a type of coquette; he merely discovered a

type of practical joker.  One may say the type of practical joker, for

these people are exactly alike all over the world.  Their equipment is

always the same: a vulgar mind, a puerile wit, a cruel disposition as a

rule, and always the spirit of treachery.



In his Chapter IV.  M. Bourget has two or three columns gravely devoted

to the collating and examining and psychologizing of these sorry little

frauds.  One is not moved to laugh.  There is nothing funny in the

situation; it is only pathetic.  The stranger gave those people his

confidence, and they dishonorably treated him in return.



But one must be allowed to suspect that M. Bourget was a little to blame

himself.  Even a practical joker has some little judgment.  He has to

exercise some degree of sagacity in selecting his prey if he would save

himself from getting into trouble.  In my time I have seldom seen such

daring things marketed at any price as these conscienceless folk have

worked off at par on this confiding observer.  It compels the conviction

that there was something about him that bred in those speculators a quite

unusual sense of safety, and encouraged them to strain their powers in

his behalf.  They seem to have satisfied themselves that all he wanted

was "significant" facts, and that he was not accustomed to examine the

source whence they proceeded.  It is plain that there was a sort of

conspiracy against him almost from the start--a conspiracy to freight him

up with all the strange extravagances those people's decayed brains could

invent.



The lengths to which they went are next to incredible.  They told him

things which surely would have excited any one else's suspicion, but they

did not excite his.  Consider this:



          "There is not in all the United States an entirely nude

          statue."



If an angel should come down and say such a thing about heaven, a

reasonably cautious observer would take that angel's number and inquire a

little further before he added it to his catch.  What does the present

observer do?  Adds it.  Adds it at once.  Adds it, and labels it with

this innocent comment:



          "This small fact is strangely significant."



It does seem to me that this kind of observing is defective.



Here is another curiosity which some liberal person made him a present

of.  I should think it ought to have disturbed the deep slumber of his

suspicion a little, but it didn't.  It was a note from a fog-horn for

strenuousness, it seems to me, but the doomed voyager did not catch it.

If he had but caught it, it would have saved him from several disasters:



          "If the American knows that you are traveling to take notes, he

          is interested in it, and at the same time rejoices in it, as in

          a tribute."



Again, this is defective observation.  It is human to like to be praised;

one can even notice it in the French.  But it is not human to like to be

ridiculed, even when it comes in the form of a "tribute."  I think a

little psychologizing ought to have come in there.  Something like this:

A dog does not like to be ridiculed, a redskin does not like to be

ridiculed, a negro does not like to be ridiculed, a Chinaman does not

like to be ridiculed; let us deduce from these significant facts this

formula: the American's grade being higher than these, and the chain-of

argument stretching unbroken all the way up to him, there is room for

suspicion that the person who said the American likes to be ridiculed,

and regards it as a tribute, is not a capable observer.



I feel persuaded that in the matter of psychologizing, a professional is

too apt to yield to the fascinations of the loftier regions of that great

art, to the neglect of its lowlier walks.  Every now and then, at

half-hour intervals, M.  Bourget collects a hatful of airy inaccuracies

and dissolves them in a panful of assorted abstractions, and runs the

charge into a mould and turns you out a compact principle which will

explain an American girl, or an American woman, or why new people yearn

for old things, or any other impossible riddle which a person wants

answered.



It seems to be conceded that there are a few human peculiarities that can

be generalized and located here and there in the world and named by the

name of the nation where they are found.  I wonder what they are.

Perhaps one of them is temperament.  One speaks of French vivacity and

German gravity and English stubbornness.  There is no American

temperament.  The nearest that one can come at it is to say there are two

--the composed Northern and the impetuous Southern; and both are found in

other countries.  Morals?  Purity of women may fairly be called universal

with us, but that is the case in some other countries.  We have no

monopoly of it; it cannot be named American.  I think that there is but a

single specialty with us, only one thing that can be called by the wide

name "American."  That is the national devotion to ice-water.  All

Germans drink beer, but the British nation drinks beer, too; so neither

of those peoples is the beer-drinking nation.  I suppose we do stand

alone in having a drink that nobody likes but ourselves.  When we have

been a month in Europe we lose our craving for it, and we finally tell

the hotel folk that they needn't provide it any more.  Yet we hardly

touch our native shore again, winter or summer, before we are eager for

it.  The reasons for this state of things have not been psychologized

yet.  I drop the hint and say no more.



It is my belief that there are some "national" traits and things

scattered about the world that are mere superstitions, frauds that have

lived so long that they have the solid look of facts.  One of them is the

dogma that the French are the only chaste people in the world.  Ever

since I arrived in France this last time I have been accumulating doubts

about that; and before I leave this sunny land again I will gather in a

few random statistics and psychologize the plausibilities out of it.  If

people are to come over to America and find fault with our girls and our

women, and psychologize every little thing they do, and try to teach them

how to behave, and how to cultivate themselves up to where one cannot

tell them from the French model, I intend to find out whether those

missionaries are qualified or not.  A nation ought always to examine into

this detail before engaging the teacher for good.  This last one has let

fall a remark which renewed those doubts of mine when I read it:



          "In our high Parisian existence, for instance, we find applied

          to arts and luxury, and to debauchery, all the powers and all

          the weaknesses of the French soul."



You see, it amounts to a trade with the French soul; a profession;

a science; the serious business of life, so to speak, in our high

Parisian existence.  I do not quite like the look of it.  I question if

it can be taught with profit in our country, except, of course, to those

pathetic, neglected minds that are waiting there so yearningly for the

education which M.  Bourget is going to furnish them from the serene

summits of our high Parisian life.



I spoke a moment ago of the existence of some superstitions that have

been parading the world as facts this long time.  For instance, consider

the Dollar.  The world seems to think that the love of money is

"American"; and that the mad desire to get suddenly rich is "American."

I believe that both of these things are merely and broadly human, not

American monopolies at all.  The love of money is natural to all nations,

for money is a good and strong friend.  I think that this love has

existed everywhere, ever since the Bible called it the root of all evil.



I think that the reason why we Americans seem to be so addicted to trying

to get rich suddenly is merely because the opportunity to make promising

efforts in that direction has offered itself to us with a frequency out

of all proportion to the European experience.  For eighty years this

opportunity has been offering itself in one new town or region after

another straight westward, step by step, all the way from the Atlantic

coast to the Pacific.  When a mechanic could buy ten town lots on

tolerably long credit for ten months' savings out of his wages, and

reasonably expect to sell them in a couple of years for ten times what he

gave for them, it was human for him to try the venture, and he did it no

matter what his nationality was.  He would have done it in Europe or

China if he had had the same chance.



In the flush times in the silver regions a cook or any other humble

worker stood a very good chance to get rich out of a trifle of money

risked in a stock deal; and that person promptly took that risk, no

matter what his or her nationality might be.  I was there, and saw it.



But these opportunities have not been plenty in our Southern States; so

there you have a prodigious region where the rush for sudden wealth is

almost an unknown thing--and has been, from the beginning.



Europe has offered few opportunities for poor Tom, Dick, and Harry; but

when she has offered one, there has been no noticeable difference between

European eagerness and American.  England saw this in the wild days of

the Railroad King; France saw it in 1720--time of Law and the Mississippi

Bubble.  I am sure I have never seen in the gold and silver mines any

madness, fury, frenzy to get suddenly rich which was even remotely

comparable to that which raged in France in the Bubble day.  If I had a

cyclopaedia here I could turn to that memorable case, and satisfy nearly

anybody that the hunger for the sudden dollar is no more "American" than

it is French.  And if I could furnish an American opportunity to staid

Germany, I think I could wake her up like a house afire.



But I must return to the Generalizations, Psychologizings, Deductions.

When M. Bourget is exploiting these arts, it is then that he is

peculiarly and particularly himself.  His ways are wholly original when

he encounters a trait or a custom which is new to him.  Another person

would merely examine the find, verify it, estimate its value, and let it

go; but that is not sufficient for M. Bourget: he always wants to know

why that thing exists, he wants to know how it came to happen; and he

will not let go of it until he has found out.  And in every instance he

will find that reason where no one but himself would have thought of

looking for it.  He does not seem to care for a reason that is not

picturesquely located; one might almost say picturesquely and impossibly

located.



He found out that in America men do not try to hunt down young married

women.  At once, as usual, he wanted to know why.  Any one could have

told him.  He could have divined it by the lights thrown by the novels of

the country.  But no, he preferred to find out for himself.  He has a

trustfulness as regards men and facts which is fine and unusual; he is

not particular about the source of a fact, he is not particular about the

character and standing of the fact itself; but when it comes to pounding

out the reason for the existence of the fact, he will trust no one but

himself.



In the present instance here was his fact: American young married women

are not pursued by the corruptor; and here was the question:  What is it

that protects her?



It seems quite unlikely that that problem could have offered difficulties

to any but a trained philosopher.  Nearly any person would have said to

M. Bourget: "Oh, that is very simple.  It is very seldom in America that

a marriage is made on a commercial basis; our marriages, from the

beginning, have been made for love; and where love is there is no room

for the corruptor."



Now, it is interesting to see the formidable way in which M. Bourget went

at that poor, humble little thing.  He moved upon it in column--three

columns--and with artillery.



"Two reasons of a very different kind explain"--that fact.



And now that I have got so far, I am almost afraid to say what his two

reasons are, lest I be charged with inventing them.  But I will not

retreat now; I will condense them and print them, giving my word that I

am honest and not trying to deceive any one.



1.  Young married women are protected from the approaches of the seducer

in New England and vicinity by the diluted remains of a prudence created

by a Puritan law of two hundred years ago, which for a while punished

adultery with death.



2.  And young married women of the other forty or fifty States are

protected by laws which afford extraordinary facilities for divorce.



If I have not lost my mind I have accurately conveyed those two Vesuvian

irruptions of philosophy.  But the reader can consult Chapter IV. of

'Outre-Mer', and decide for himself.  Let us examine this paralyzing

Deduction or Explanation by the light of a few sane facts.



1.  This universality of "protection" has existed in our country from the

beginning; before the death penalty existed in New England, and during

all the generations that have dragged by since it was annulled.



2.  Extraordinary facilities for divorce are of such recent creation that

any middle-aged American can remember a time when such things had not yet

been thought of.



Let us suppose that the first easy divorce law went into effect forty

years ago, and got noised around and fairly started in business

thirty-five years ago, when we had, say, 25,000,000 of white population.

Let us suppose that among 5,000,000 of them the young married women were

"protected" by the surviving shudder of that ancient Puritan scare--what

is M. Bourget going to do about those who lived among the 20,000,000?

They were clean in their morals, they were pure, yet there was no easy

divorce law to protect them.



Awhile ago I said that M.  Bourget's method of truth-seeking--hunting for

it in out-of-the-way places--was new; but that was an error.  I remember

that when Leverrier discovered the Milky Way, he and the other

astronomers began to theorize about it in substantially the same fashion

which M. Bourget employs in his seasonings about American social facts

and their origin.  Leverrier advanced the hypothesis that the Milky Way

was caused by gaseous protoplasmic emanations from the field of Waterloo,

which, ascending to an altitude determinable by their own specific

gravity, became luminous through the development and exposure--by the

natural processes of animal decay--of the phosphorus contained in them.



This theory was warmly complimented by Ptolemy, who, however, after much

thought and research, decided that he could not accept it as final.  His

own theory was that the Milky Way was an emigration of lightning bugs;

and he supported and reinforced this theorem by the well-known fact that

the locusts do like that in Egypt.



Giordano Bruno also was outspoken in his praises of Leverrier's important

contribution to astronomical science, and was at first inclined to regard

it as conclusive; but later, conceiving it to be erroneous, he pronounced

against it, and advanced the hypothesis that the Milky Way was a

detachment or corps of stars which became arrested and held in 'suspenso

suspensorum' by refraction of gravitation while on the march to join

their several constellations; a proposition for which he was afterwards

burned at the stake in Jacksonville, Illinois.



These were all brilliant and picturesque theories, and each was received

with enthusiasm by the scientific world; but when a New England farmer,

who was not a thinker, but only a plain sort of person who tried to

account for large facts in simple ways, came out with the opinion that

the Milky Way was just common, ordinary stars, and was put where it was

because God "wanted to hev it so," the admirable idea fell perfectly

flat.



As a literary artist, M. Bourget is as fresh and striking as he is as a

scientific one.  He says, "Above all, I do not believe much in

anecdotes."



Why?  "In history they are all false"--a sufficiently broad statement

--"in literature all libelous"--also a sufficiently sweeping statement,

coming from a critic who notes that we are "a people who are peculiarly

extravagant in our language--" and when it is a matter of social life,

"almost all biased."  It seems to amount to stultification, almost.  He

has built two or three breeds of American coquettes out of anecdotes--

mainly "biased" ones, I suppose; and, as they occur "in literature,"

furnished by his pen, they must be "all libelous."  Or did he mean not in

literature or anecdotes about literature or literary people?  I am not

able to answer that.  Perhaps the original would be clearer, but I have

only the translation of this installment by me.  I think the remark had

an intention; also that this intention was booked for the trip; but that

either in the hurry of the remark's departure it got left, or in the

confusion of changing cars at the translator's frontier it got

side-tracked.



"But on the other hand I believe in statistics; and those on divorces

appear to me to be most conclusive."  And he sets himself the task of

explaining--in a couple of columns--the process by which Easy-Divorce

conceived, invented, originated, developed, and perfected an

empire-embracing condition of sexual purity in the States.  IN 40 YEARS.

No, he doesn't state the interval.  With all his passion for statistics

he forgot to ask how long it took to produce this gigantic miracle.



I have followed his pleasant but devious trail through those columns,

but I was not able to get hold of his argument and find out what it was.

I was not even able to find out where it left off.  It seemed to

gradually dissolve and flow off into other matters.  I followed it with

interest, for I was anxious to learn how easy-divorce eradicated adultery

in America, but I was disappointed; I have no idea yet how it did it.

I only know it didn't.  But that is not valuable; I knew it before.



Well, humor is the great thing, the saving thing, after all.  The minute

it crops up, all our hardnesses yield, all our irritations and

resentments flit away, and a sunny spirit takes their place.  And so,

when M. Bourget said that bright thing about our grandfathers, I broke

all up.  I remember exploding its American countermine once, under that

grand hero, Napoleon.  He was only First Consul then, and I was

Consul-General--for the United States, of course; but we were very

intimate, notwithstanding the difference in rank, for I waived that.

One day something offered the opening, and he said:



"Well, General, I suppose life can never get entirely dull to an

American, because whenever he can't strike up any other way to put in his

time he can always get away with a few years trying to find out who his

grandfather was!"



I fairly shouted, for I had never heard it sound better; and then I was

back at him as quick as a flash--"Right, your Excellency!  But I reckon

a Frenchman's got his little stand-by for a dull time, too; because when

all other interests fail he can turn in and see if he can't find out who

his father was!"



Well, you should have heard him just whoop, and cackle, and carry on!

He reached up and hit me one on the shoulder, and says:



"Land, but it's good!  It's im-mensely good!  I'George, I never heard it

said so good in my life before!  Say it again."



So I said it again, and he said his again, and I said mine again, and

then he did, and then I did, and then he did, and we kept on doing it,

and doing it, and I never had such a good time, and he said the same.

In my opinion there isn't anything that is as killing as one of those

dear old ripe pensioners if you know how to snatch it out in a kind of

a fresh sort of original way.



But I wish M. Bourget had read more of our novels before he came.  It is

the only way to thoroughly understand a people.  When I found I was

coming to Paris, I read 'La Terre'.













A LITTLE NOTE TO M. PAUL BOURGET



          [The preceding squib was assailed in the North American Review

          in an article entitled "Mark Twain and Paul Bourget," by Max

          O'Rell.  The following little note is a Rejoinder to that

          article.  It is possible that the position assumed here--that

          M. Bourget dictated the O'Rell article himself--is untenable.]



You have every right, my dear M. Bourget, to retort upon me by dictation,

if you prefer that method to writing at me with your pen; but if I may

say it without hurt--and certainly I mean no offence--I believe you would

have acquitted yourself better with the pen.  With the pen you are at

home; it is your natural weapon; you use it with grace, eloquence, charm,

persuasiveness, when men are to be convinced, and with formidable effect

when they have earned a castigation.  But I am sure I see signs in the

above article that you are either unaccustomed to dictating or are out of

practice.  If you will re-read it you will notice, yourself, that it

lacks definiteness; that it lacks purpose; that it lacks coherence; that

it lacks a subject to talk about; that it is loose and wabbly; that it

wanders around; that it loses itself early and does not find itself any

more.  There are some other defects, as you will notice, but I think I

have named the main ones.  I feel sure that they are all due to your lack

of practice in dictating.



Inasmuch as you had not signed it I had the impression at first that you

had not dictated it.  But only for a moment.  Certain quite simple and

definite facts reminded me that the article had to come from you, for the

reason that it could not come from any one else without a specific

invitation from you or from me.  I mean, it could not except as an

intrusion, a transgression of the law which forbids strangers to mix into

a private dispute between friends, unasked.



Those simple and definite facts were these: I had published an article in

this magazine, with you for my subject; just you yourself; I stuck

strictly to that one subject, and did not interlard any other.  No one,

of course, could call me to account but you alone, or your authorized

representative.  I asked some questions--asked them of myself.

I answered them myself.  My article was thirteen pages long, and all

devoted to you; devoted to you, and divided up in this way: one page of

guesses as to what subjects you would instruct us in, as teacher; one

page of doubts as to the effectiveness of your method of examining us and

our ways; two or three pages of criticism of your method, and of certain

results which it furnished you; two or three pages of attempts to show

the justness of these same criticisms; half a dozen pages made up of

slight fault-findings with certain minor details of your literary

workmanship, of extracts from your 'Outre-Mer' and comments upon them;

then I closed with an anecdote.  I repeat--for certain reasons--that I

closed with an anecdote.



When I was asked by this magazine if I wished to "answer" a "reply" to

that article of mine, I said "yes," and waited in Paris for the

proof-sheets of the "reply" to come.  I already knew, by the cablegram,

that the "reply" would not be signed by you, but upon reflection I knew

it would be dictated by you, because no volunteer would feel himself at

liberty to assume your championship in a private dispute, unasked, in

view of the fact that you are quite well able to take care of your

matters of that sort yourself and are not in need of any one's help. No,

a volunteer could not make such a venture.  It would be too immodest.

Also too gratuitously generous.  And a shade too self-sufficient.  No,

he could not venture it.  It would look too much like anxiety to get in

at a feast where no plate had been provided for him.  In fact he could

not get in at all, except by the back way, and with a false key; that is

to say, a pretext--a pretext invented for the occasion by putting into

my mouth words which I did not use, and by wresting sayings of mine from

their plain and true meaning.  Would he resort to methods like those to

get in?  No; there are no people of that kind.  So then I knew for a

certainty that you dictated the Reply yourself.  I knew you did it to

save yourself manual labor.



And you had the right, as I have already said and I am content--perfectly

content.



Yet it would have been little trouble to you, and a great kindness to me,

if you had written your Reply all out with your own capable hand.



Because then it would have replied--and that is really what a Reply is

for.  Broadly speaking, its function is to refute--as you will easily

concede.  That leaves something for the other person to take hold of:

he has a chance to reply to the Reply, he has a chance to refute the

refutation.  This would have happened if you had written it out instead

of dictating.  Dictating is nearly sure to unconcentrate the dictator's

mind, when he is out of practice, confuse him, and betray him into using

one set of literary rules when he ought to use a quite different set.

Often it betrays him into employing the RULES FOR CONVERSATION BETWEEN A

SHOUTER AND A DEAF PERSON--as in the present case--when he ought to

employ the RULES FOR CONDUCTING DISCUSSION WITH A FAULT-FINDER.  The

great foundation-rule and basic principle of discussion with a

fault-finder is relevancy and concentration upon the subject; whereas

the great foundation-rule and basic principle governing conversation

between a shouter and a deaf person is irrelevancy and persistent

desertion of the topic in hand.  If I may be allowed to illustrate by

quoting example IV., section from chapter ix. of "Revised Rules for

Conducting Conversation between a Shouter and a Deaf Person," it will

assist us in getting a clear idea of the difference between the two sets

of rules:



Shouter.  Did you say his name is WETHERBY?



Deaf Person.  Change?  Yes, I think it will.  Though if it should clear

off I--



Shouter.  It's his NAME I want--his NAME.



Deaf Person.  Maybe so, maybe so; but it will only be a shower, I think.



Shouter.  No, no, no!--you have quite misunderSTOOD me.  If--



Deaf Person.  Ah!  GOOD morning; I am sorry you must go.  But call again,

and let me continue to be of assistance to you in every way I can.





You see it is a perfect kodak of the article you have dictated.  It is

really curious and interesting when you come to compare it with yours;

in detail, with my former article to which it is a Reply in your hand.

I talk twelve pages about your American instruction projects, and your

doubtful scientific system, and your painstaking classification of

nonexistent things, and your diligence and zeal and sincerity, and your

disloyal attitude towards anecdotes, and your undue reverence for unsafe

statistics and far facts that lack a pedigree; and you turn around and

come back at me with eight pages of weather.



I do not see how a person can act so.  It is good of you to repeat, with

change of language, in the bulk of your rejoinder, so much of my own

article, and adopt my sentiments, and make them over, and put new buttons

on; and I like the compliment, and am frank to say so; but agreeing with

a person cripples controversy and ought not to be allowed.  It is

weather; and of almost the worst sort.  It pleases me greatly to hear you

discourse with such approval and expansiveness upon my text:



"A foreigner can photograph the exteriors of a nation, but I think that

is as far as he can get.  I think that no foreigner can report its

interior;"--[And you say: "A man of average intelligence, who has passed

six months among a people, cannot express opinions that are worth jotting

down, but he can form impressions that are worth repeating.  For my part,

I think that foreigners' impressions are more interesting than native

opinions.  After all, such impressions merely mean 'how the country

struck the foreigner.'"]--which is a quite clear way of saying that a

foreigner's report is only valuable when it restricts itself to

impressions.  It pleases me to have you follow my lead in that glowing

way, but it leaves me nothing to combat.  You should give me something to

deny and refute; I would do as much for you.



It pleases me to have you playfully warn the public against taking one of

your books seriously.--[When I published Jonathan and his Continent, I

wrote in a preface addressed to Jonathan: "If ever you should insist in

seeing in this little volume a serious study of your country and of your

countrymen, I warn you that your world-wide fame for humor will be

exploded."]--Because I used to do that cunning thing myself in earlier

days.  I did it in a prefatory note to a book of mine called Tom Sawyer.





                         NOTICE.



          Persons attempting to find a motive in

          this narrative will be prosecuted;

          persons attempting to find a moral in it

          will be banished; persons attempting to

          find a plot in it will be shot.

                              BY ORDER OF THE AUTHOR

                              PER G. G., CHIEF OF ORDNANCE.





The kernel is the same in both prefaces, you see--the public must

not take us too seriously.  If we remove that kernel we remove the

life-principle, and the preface is a corpse.  Yes, it pleases me to have

you use that idea, for it is a high compliment.  But is leaves me

nothing to combat; and that is damage to me.



Am I seeming to say that your Reply is not a reply at all, M. Bourget?

If so, I must modify that; it is too sweeping.  For you have furnished a

general answer to my inquiry as to what France through you--can teach us.

--["What could France teach America!" exclaims Mark Twain.  France can

teach America all the higher pursuits of life, and there is more artistic

feeling and refinement in a street of French workingmen than in many

avenues inhabited by American millionaires.  She can teach her, not

perhaps how to work, but how to rest, how to live, how to be happy.

She can teach her that the aim of life is not money-making, but that

money-making is only a means to obtain an end.  She can teach her that

wives are not expensive toys, but useful partners, friends, and

confidants, who should always keep men under their wholesome influence by

their diplomacy, their tact, their common-sense, without bumptiousness.

These qualities, added to the highest standard of morality (not angular

and morose, but cheerful morality), are conceded to Frenchwomen by

whoever knows something of French life outside of the Paris boulevards,

and Mark Twain's ill-natured sneer cannot even so much as stain them.



I might tell Mark Twain that in France a man who was seen tipsy in his

club would immediately see his name canceled from membership.  A man who

had settled his fortune on his wife to avoid meeting his creditors would

be refused admission into any decent society.  Many a Frenchman has blown

his brains out rather than declare himself a bankrupt.  Now would Mark

Twain remark to this: 'An American is not such a fool: when a creditor

stands in his way he closes his doors, and reopens them the following

day.  When he has been a bankrupt three times he can retire from

business?']--It is a good answer.



It relates to manners, customs, and morals--three things concerning which

we can never have exhaustive and determinate statistics, and so the

verdicts delivered upon them must always lack conclusiveness and be

subject to revision; but you have stated the truth, possibly, as nearly

as any one could do it, in the circumstances.  But why did you choose a

detail of my question which could be answered only with vague hearsay

evidence, and go right by one which could have been answered with deadly

facts?--facts in everybody's reach, facts which none can dispute.

I asked what France could teach us about government.  I laid myself

pretty wide open, there; and I thought I was handsomely generous, too,

when I did it.  France can teach us how to levy village and city taxes

which distribute the burden with a nearer approach to perfect fairness

than is the case in any other land; and she can teach us the wisest and

surest system of collecting them that exists.  She can teach us how to

elect a President in a sane way; and also how to do it without throwing

the country into earthquakes and convulsions that cripple and embarrass

business, stir up party hatred in the hearts of men, and make peaceful

people wish the term extended to thirty years.  France can teach us--but

enough of that part of the question.  And what else can France teach us?

She can teach us all the fine arts--and does.  She throws open her

hospitable art academies, and says to us, "Come"--and we come, troops and

troops of our young and gifted; and she sets over us the ablest masters

in the world and bearing the greatest names; and she, teaches us all that

we are capable of learning, and persuades us and encourages us with

prizes and honors, much as if we were somehow children of her own; and

when this noble education is finished and we are ready to carry it home

and spread its gracious ministries abroad over our nation, and we come

with homage and gratitude and ask France for the bill--there is nothing

to pay.  And in return for this imperial generosity, what does America

do?  She charges a duty on French works of art!



I wish I had your end of this dispute; I should have something worth

talking about.  If you would only furnish me something to argue,

something to refute--but you persistently won't.  You leave good chances

unutilized and spend your strength in proving and establishing

unimportant things.  For instance, you have proven and established these

eight facts here following--a good score as to number, but not worth

while:



Mark Twain is--



1.  "Insulting."



2.  (Sarcastically speaking) "This refined humor, 1st."



3.  Prefers the manure-pile to the violets.



4.  Has uttered "an ill-natured sneer."



5.  Is "nasty."



6.  Needs a "lesson in politeness and good manners."



7.  Has published a "nasty article."



8.  Has made remarks "unworthy of a gentleman."--["It is more funny than

his" (Mark Twain's) "anecdote, and would have been less insulting."]



A quoted remark of mine "is a gross insult to a nation friendly to

America."



"He has read La Terre, this refined humorist."



"When Mark Twain visits a garden .  .  .  he goes in the far-away corner

where the soil is prepared."



"Mark Twain's ill-natured sneer cannot so much as stain them" (the

Frenchwomen).



"When he" (Mark Twain) "takes his revenge he is unkind, unfair, bitter,

nasty."



"But not even your nasty article on my country, Mark," etc.



"Mark might certainly have derived from it" (M. Bourget's book) "a lesson

in politeness and good manners."



A quoted remark of mine is "unworthy of a gentleman."--



These are all true, but really they are not valuable; no one cares much

for such finds.  In our American magazines we recognize this and suppress

them.  We avoid naming them.  American writers never allow themselves to

name them.  It would look as if they were in a temper, and we hold that

exhibitions of temper in public are not good form except in the very

young and inexperienced.  And even if we had the disposition to name

them, in order to fill up a gap when we were short of ideas and

arguments, our magazines would not allow us to do it, because they think

that such words sully their pages.  This present magazine is particularly

strenuous about it.  Its note to me announcing the forwarding of your

proof-sheets to France closed thus--for your protection:



"It is needless to ask you to avoid anything that he might consider as

personal."



It was well enough, as a measure of precaution, but really it was not

needed.  You can trust me implicitly, M. Bourget; I shall never call you

any names in print which I should be ashamed to call you with your

unoffending and dearest ones present.



Indeed, we are reserved, and particular in America to a degree which you

would consider exaggerated.  For instance, we should not write notes like

that one of yours to a lady for a small fault--or a large one.--[When M.

Paul Bourget indulges in a little chaffing at the expense of the

Americans, "who can always get away with a few years' trying to find out

who their grandfathers were,"] he merely makes an allusion to an American

foible; but, forsooth, what a kind man, what a humorist Mark Twain is

when he retorts by calling France a nation of bastards!  How the

Americans of culture and refinement will admire him for thus speaking in

their name!



Snobbery .  .  .  .  I could give Mark Twain an example of the American

specimen.  It is a piquant story.  I never published it because I feared

my readers might think that I was giving them a typical illustration of

American character instead of a rare exception.



I was once booked by my manager to give a causerie in the drawing-room of

a New York millionaire.  I accepted with reluctance.  I do not like

private engagements.  At five o'clock on the day the causerie was to be

given, the lady sent to my manager to say that she would expect me to

arrive at nine o'clock and to speak for about an hour.  Then she wrote a

postscript.  Many women are unfortunate there.  Their minds are full of

after-thoughts, and the most important part of their letters is generally

to be found after their signature.  This lady's P. S. ran thus: "I

suppose he will not expect to be entertained after the lecture."



I fairly shorted, as Mark Twain would say, and then, indulging myself in

a bit of snobbishness, I was back at her as quick as a flash:



"Dear Madam: As a literary man of some reputation, I have many times had

the pleasure of being entertained by the members of the old aristocracy

of France.  I have also many times had the pleasure of being entertained

by the members of the old aristocracy of England.  If it may interest

you, I can even tell you that I have several times had the honor of being

entertained by royalty; but my ambition has never been so wild as to

expect that one day I might be entertained by the aristocracy of New

York.  No, I do not expect to be entertained by you, nor do I want you to

expect me to entertain you and your friends to-night, for I decline to

keep the engagement."



Now, I could fill a book on America with reminiscences of this sort,

adding a few chapters on bosses and boodlers, on New York 'chronique

scandaleuse', on the tenement houses of the large cities, on the

gambling-hells of Denver, and the dens of San Francisco, and what not!

[But not even your nasty article on my country, Mark, will make me do

it.]--We should not think it kind.  No matter how much we might have

associated with kings and nobilities, we should not think it right to

crush her with it and make her ashamed of her lowlier walk in life; for

we have a saying, "Who humiliates my mother includes his own."



Do I seriously imagine you to be the author of that strange letter,

M. Bourget?  Indeed I do not.  I believe it to have been surreptitiously

inserted by your amanuensis when your back was turned.  I think he did it

with a good motive, expecting it to add force and piquancy to your

article, but it does not reflect your nature, and I know it will grieve

you when you see it.  I also think he interlarded many other things which

you will disapprove of when you see them.  I am certain that all the

harsh names discharged at me come from him, not you.  No doubt you could

have proved me entitled to them with as little trouble as it has cost him

to do it, but it would have been your disposition to hunt game of a

higher quality.



Why, I even doubt if it is you who furnish me all that excellent

information about Balzac and those others.--["Now the style of M.

Bourget and many other French writers is apparently a closed letter to

Mark Twain; but let us leave that alone.  Has he read Erckmann-Chatrian,

Victor Hugo, Lamartine, Edmond About, Cherbuliez, Renan?  Has he read

Gustave Droz's 'Monsieur, Madame, et Bebe', and those books which leave

for a long time a perfume about you?  Has he read the novels of Alexandre

Dumas, Eugene Sue, George Sand, and Balzac?  Has he read Victor Hugo's

'Les Miserables' and 'Notre Dame de Paris'?  Has he read or heard the

plays of Sandeau, Augier, Dumas, and Sardou, the works of those Titans of

modern literature, whose names will be household words all over the world

for hundreds of years to come?  He has read La Terre--this kind-hearted,

refined humorist!  When Mark Twain visits a garden does he smell the

violets, the roses, the jasmine, or the honeysuckle?  No, he goes in the

far-away corner where the soil is prepared.  Hear what he says: 'I wish M.

Paul Bourget had read more of our novels before he came.  It is the only

way to thoroughly understand a people.  When I found I was coming to

Paris I read La Terre.'"]--All this in simple justice to you--and to me;

for, to gravely accept those interlardings as yours would be to wrong

your head and heart, and at the same time convict myself of being

equipped with a vacancy where my penetration ought to be lodged.



And now finally I must uncover the secret pain, the wee sore from which

the Reply grew--the anecdote which closed my recent article--and consider

how it is that this pimple has spread to these cancerous dimensions.

If any but you had dictated the Reply, M. Bourget, I would know that that

anecdote was twisted around and its intention magnified some hundreds of

times, in order that it might be used as a pretext to creep in the back

way.  But I accuse you of nothing--nothing but error.  When you say that

I "retort by calling France a nation of bastards," it is an error.  And

not a small one, but a large one.  I made no such remark, nor anything

resembling it.  Moreover, the magazine would not have allowed me to use

so gross a word as that.



You told an anecdote.  A funny one--I admit that.  It hit a foible of our

American aristocracy, and it stung me--I admit that; it stung me sharply.

It was like this: You found some ancient portraits of French kings in the

gallery of one of our aristocracy, and you said:



"He has the Grand Monarch, but where is the portrait of his grandfather?"

That is, the American aristocrat's grandfather.



Now that hits only a few of us, I grant--just the upper crust only--but

it hits exceedingly hard.



I wondered if there was any way of getting back at you.  In one of your

chapters I found this chance:



"In our high Parisian existence, for instance, we find applied to arts

and luxury, and to debauchery, all the powers and all the weaknesses of

the French soul."



You see?  Your "higher Parisian" class--not everybody, not the nation,

but only the top crust of the Ovation--applies to debauchery all the

powers of its soul.



I argued to myself that that energy must produce results.  So I built an

anecdote out of your remark.  In it I make Napoleon Bonaparte say to me

--but see for yourself the anecdote (ingeniously clipped and curtailed)

in paragraph eleven of your Reply.--[So, I repeat, Mark Twain does not

like M. Paul Bourget's book.  So long as he makes light fun of the great

French writer he is at home, he is pleasant, he is the American humorist

we know.  When he takes his revenge (and where is the reason for taking

a revenge?) he is unkind, unfair, bitter, nasty.]



For example:

See his answer to a Frenchman who jokingly remarks to him:



"I suppose life can never get entirely dull to an American, because

whenever he can't strike up any other way to put in his time, he can

always get away with a few years trying to find out who his grandfather

was."



Hear the answer:



"I reckon a Frenchman's got his little standby for a dull time, too;

because when all other interests fail, he can turn in and see if he can't

find out who his father was."



The first remark is a good-humored bit of chaffing on American snobbery.

I may be utterly destitute of humor, but I call the second remark a

gratuitous charge of immorality hurled at the French women--a remark

unworthy of a man who has the ear of the public, unworthy of a gentleman,

a gross insult to a nation friendly to America, a nation that helped Mark

Twain's ancestors in their struggle for liberty, a nation where to-day it

is enough to say that you are American to see every door open wide to

you.



If Mark Twain was hard up in search of, a French "chestnut," I might have

told him the following little anecdote.  It is more funny than his, and

would have been less insulting: Two little street boys are abusing each

other.  "Ah, hold your tongue," says one, "you ain't got no father."



"Ain't got no father!" replies the other; "I've got more fathers than

you."



Now, then, your anecdote about the grandfathers hurt me.  Why?  Because

it had a point.  It wouldn't have hurt me if it hadn't had point.  You

wouldn't have wasted space on it if it hadn't had point.



My anecdote has hurt you.  Why?  Because it had point, I suppose.  It

wouldn't have hurt you if it hadn't had point.  I judged from your remark

about the diligence and industry of the high Parisian upper crust that it

would have some point, but really I had no idea what a gold-mine I had

struck.  I never suspected that the point was going to stick into the

entire nation; but of course you know your nation better than I do, and

if you think it punctures them all, I have to yield to your judgment.

But you are to blame, your own self.  Your remark misled me.  I supposed

the industry was confined to that little unnumerous upper layer.



Well, now that the unfortunate thing has been done, let us do what we can

to undo it.  There must be a way, M.  Bourget, and I am willing to do

anything that will help; for I am as sorry as you can be yourself.



I will tell you what I think will be the very thing.



We will swap anecdotes.  I will take your anecdote and you take mine.  I

will say to the dukes and counts and princes of the ancient nobility of

France:



"Ha, ha! You must have a pretty hard time trying to find out who your

grandfathers were?"



They will merely smile indifferently and not feel hurt, because they can

trace their lineage back through centuries.



And you will hurl mine at every individual in the American nation,

saying:



"And you must have a pretty hard time trying to find out who your fathers

were."  They will merely smile indifferently, and not feel hurt, because

they haven't any difficulty in finding their fathers.



Do you get the idea?  The whole harm in the anecdotes is in the point,

you see; and when we swap them around that way, they haven't any.



That settles it perfectly and beautifully, and I am glad I thought of it.

I am very glad indeed, M. Bourget; for it was just that little wee thing

that caused the whole difficulty and made you dictate the Reply, and your

amanuensis call me all those hard names which the magazines dislike so.

And I did it all in fun, too, trying to cap your funny anecdote with

another one--on the give-and-take principle, you know--which is American.

I didn't know that with the French it was all give and no take, and you

didn't tell me.  But now that I have made everything comfortable again,

and fixed both anecdotes so they can never have any point any more, I

know you will forgive me.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Essays on Paul Bourget

by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)















TOM SAWYER ABROAD









CHAPTER I. TOM SEEKS NEW ADVENTURES



DO you reckon Tom Sawyer was satisfied after all them adventures? I mean

the adventures we had down the river, and the time we set the darky Jim

free and Tom got shot in the leg. No, he wasn't. It only just p'isoned

him for more. That was all the effect it had. You see, when we three came

back up the river in glory, as you may say, from that long travel, and

the village received us with a torchlight procession and speeches, and

everybody hurrah'd and shouted, it made us heroes, and that was what Tom

Sawyer had always been hankering to be.



For a while he WAS satisfied. Everybody made much of him, and he tilted

up his nose and stepped around the town as though he owned it. Some

called him Tom Sawyer the Traveler, and that just swelled him up fit to

bust. You see he laid over me and Jim considerable, because we only went

down the river on a raft and came back by the steamboat, but Tom went by

the steamboat both ways. The boys envied me and Jim a good deal, but

land! they just knuckled to the dirt before TOM.



Well, I don't know; maybe he might have been satisfied if it hadn't been

for old Nat Parsons, which was postmaster, and powerful long and slim,

and kind o' good-hearted and silly, and bald-headed, on account of his

age, and about the talkiest old cretur I ever see. For as much as thirty

years he'd been the only man in the village that had a reputation--I mean

a reputation for being a traveler, and of course he was mortal proud of

it, and it was reckoned that in the course of that thirty years he had

told about that journey over a million times and enjoyed it every time.

And now comes along a boy not quite fifteen, and sets everybody admiring

and gawking over HIS travels, and it just give the poor old man the high

strikes. It made him sick to listen to Tom, and to hear the people say

"My land!" "Did you ever!" "My goodness sakes alive!" and all such

things; but he couldn't pull away from it, any more than a fly that's got

its hind leg fast in the molasses. And always when Tom come to a rest,

the poor old cretur would chip in on HIS same old travels and work them

for all they were worth; but they were pretty faded, and didn't go for

much, and it was pitiful to see. And then Tom would take another innings,

and then the old man again--and so on, and so on, for an hour and more,

each trying to beat out the other.



You see, Parsons' travels happened like this: When he first got to be

postmaster and was green in the business, there come a letter for

somebody he didn't know, and there wasn't any such person in the village.

Well, he didn't know what to do, nor how to act, and there the letter

stayed and stayed, week in and week out, till the bare sight of it gave

him a conniption. The postage wasn't paid on it, and that was another

thing to worry about. There wasn't any way to collect that ten cents, and

he reckon'd the gov'ment would hold him responsible for it and maybe turn

him out besides, when they found he hadn't collected it. Well, at last he

couldn't stand it any longer. He couldn't sleep nights, he couldn't eat,

he was thinned down to a shadder, yet he da'sn't ask anybody's advice,

for the very person he asked for advice might go back on him and let the

gov'ment know about the letter. He had the letter buried under the floor,

but that did no good; if he happened to see a person standing over the

place it'd give him the cold shivers, and loaded him up with suspicions,

and he would sit up that night till the town was still and dark, and then

he would sneak there and get it out and bury it in another place. Of

course, people got to avoiding him and shaking their heads and

whispering, because, the way he was looking and acting, they judged he

had killed somebody or done something terrible, they didn't know what,

and if he had been a stranger they would've lynched him.



Well, as I was saying, it got so he couldn't stand it any longer; so he

made up his mind to pull out for Washington, and just go to the President

of the United States and make a clean breast of the whole thing, not

keeping back an atom, and then fetch the letter out and lay it before the

whole gov'ment, and say, "Now, there she is--do with me what you're a

mind to; though as heaven is my judge I am an innocent man and not

deserving of the full penalties of the law and leaving behind me a family

that must starve and yet hadn't had a thing to do with it, which is the

whole truth and I can swear to it."



So he did it. He had a little wee bit of steamboating, and some

stage-coaching, but all the rest of the way was horseback, and it took

him three weeks to get to Washington. He saw lots of land and lots of

villages and four cities. He was gone 'most eight weeks, and there never

was such a proud man in the village as he when he got back. His travels

made him the greatest man in all that region, and the most talked about;

and people come from as much as thirty miles back in the country, and

from over in the Illinois bottoms, too, just to look at him--and there

they'd stand and gawk, and he'd gabble. You never see anything like it.



Well, there wasn't any way now to settle which was the greatest traveler;

some said it was Nat, some said it was Tom. Everybody allowed that Nat

had seen the most longitude, but they had to give in that whatever Tom

was short in longitude he had made up in latitude and climate. It was

about a stand-off; so both of them had to whoop up their dangerous

adventures, and try to get ahead THAT way. That bullet-wound in Tom's leg

was a tough thing for Nat Parsons to buck against, but he bucked the best

he could; and at a disadvantage, too, for Tom didn't set still as he'd

orter done, to be fair, but always got up and sauntered around and worked

his limp while Nat was painting up the adventure that HE had in

Washington; for Tom never let go that limp when his leg got well, but

practiced it nights at home, and kept it good as new right along.



Nat's adventure was like this; I don't know how true it is; maybe he got

it out of a paper, or somewhere, but I will say this for him, that he DID

know how to tell it. He could make anybody's flesh crawl, and he'd turn

pale and hold his breath when he told it, and sometimes women and girls

got so faint they couldn't stick it out. Well, it was this way, as near

as I can remember:



He come a-loping into Washington, and put up his horse and shoved out to

the President's house with his letter, and they told him the President

was up to the Capitol, and just going to start for Philadelphia--not a

minute to lose if he wanted to catch him. Nat 'most dropped, it made him

so sick. His horse was put up, and he didn't know what to do. But just

then along comes a darky driving an old ramshackly hack, and he see his

chance. He rushes out and shouts: "A half a dollar if you git me to the

Capitol in half an hour, and a quarter extra if you do it in twenty

minutes!"



"Done!" says the darky.



Nat he jumped in and slammed the door, and away they went a-ripping and

a-tearing over the roughest road a body ever see, and the racket of it

was something awful. Nat passed his arms through the loops and hung on

for life and death, but pretty soon the hack hit a rock and flew up in

the air, and the bottom fell out, and when it come down Nat's feet was on

the ground, and he see he was in the most desperate danger if he couldn't

keep up with the hack. He was horrible scared, but he laid into his work

for all he was worth, and hung tight to the arm-loops and made his legs

fairly fly. He yelled and shouted to the driver to stop, and so did the

crowds along the street, for they could see his legs spinning along under

the coach, and his head and shoulders bobbing inside through the windows,

and he was in awful danger; but the more they all shouted the more the

nigger whooped and yelled and lashed the horses and shouted, "Don't you

fret, I'se gwine to git you dah in time, boss; I's gwine to do it, sho'!"

for you see he thought they were all hurrying him up, and, of course, he

couldn't hear anything for the racket he was making. And so they went

ripping along, and everybody just petrified to see it; and when they got

to the Capitol at last it was the quickest trip that ever was made, and

everybody said so. The horses laid down, and Nat dropped, all tuckered

out, and he was all dust and rags and barefooted; but he was in time and

just in time, and caught the President and give him the letter, and

everything was all right, and the President give him a free pardon on the

spot, and Nat give the nigger two extra quarters instead of one, because

he could see that if he hadn't had the hack he wouldn't'a' got there in

time, nor anywhere near it.



It WAS a powerful good adventure, and Tom Sawyer had to work his

bullet-wound mighty lively to hold his own against it.



Well, by and by Tom's glory got to paling down gradu'ly, on account of

other things turning up for the people to talk about--first a horse-race,

and on top of that a house afire, and on top of that the circus, and on

top of that the eclipse; and that started a revival, same as it always

does, and by that time there wasn't any more talk about Tom, so to speak,

and you never see a person so sick and disgusted.



Pretty soon he got to worrying and fretting right along day in and day

out, and when I asked him what WAS he in such a state about, he said it

'most broke his heart to think how time was slipping away, and him

getting older and older, and no wars breaking out and no way of making a

name for himself that he could see. Now that is the way boys is always

thinking, but he was the first one I ever heard come out and say it.



So then he set to work to get up a plan to make him celebrated; and

pretty soon he struck it, and offered to take me and Jim in. Tom Sawyer

was always free and generous that way. There's a-plenty of boys that's

mighty good and friendly when YOU'VE got a good thing, but when a good

thing happens to come their way they don't say a word to you, and try to

hog it all. That warn't ever Tom Sawyer's way, I can say that for him.

There's plenty of boys that will come hankering and groveling around you

when you've got an apple and beg the core off of you; but when they've

got one, and you beg for the core and remind them how you give them a

core one time, they say thank you 'most to death, but there ain't a-going

to be no core. But I notice they always git come up with; all you got to

do is to wait.



Well, we went out in the woods on the hill, and Tom told us what it was.

It was a crusade.



"What's a crusade?" I says.



He looked scornful, the way he's always done when he was ashamed of a

person, and says:



"Huck Finn, do you mean to tell me you don't know what a crusade is?"



"No," says I, "I don't. And I don't care to, nuther. I've lived till now

and done without it, and had my health, too. But as soon as you tell me,

I'll know, and that's soon enough. I don't see any use in finding out

things and clogging up my head with them when I mayn't ever have any

occasion to use 'em. There was Lance Williams, he learned how to talk

Choctaw here till one come and dug his grave for him. Now, then, what's a

crusade? But I can tell you one thing before you begin; if it's a

patent-right, there's no money in it. Bill Thompson he--"



"Patent-right!" says he. "I never see such an idiot. Why, a crusade is a

kind of war."



I thought he must be losing his mind. But no, he was in real earnest, and

went right on, perfectly ca'm.



"A crusade is a war to recover the Holy Land from the paynim."



"Which Holy Land?"



"Why, the Holy Land--there ain't but one."



"What do we want of it?"



"Why, can't you understand? It's in the hands of the paynim, and it's our

duty to take it away from them."



"How did we come to let them git hold of it?"



"We didn't come to let them git hold of it. They always had it."



"Why, Tom, then it must belong to them, don't it?"



"Why of course it does. Who said it didn't?"



I studied over it, but couldn't seem to git at the right of it, no way. I

says:



"It's too many for me, Tom Sawyer. If I had a farm and it was mine, and

another person wanted it, would it be right for him to--"



"Oh, shucks! you don't know enough to come in when it rains, Huck Finn.

It ain't a farm, it's entirely different. You see, it's like this. They

own the land, just the mere land, and that's all they DO own; but it was

our folks, our Jews and Christians, that made it holy, and so they

haven't any business to be there defiling it. It's a shame, and we ought

not to stand it a minute. We ought to march against them and take it away

from them."



"Why, it does seem to me it's the most mixed-up thing I ever see! Now, if

I had a farm and another person--"



"Don't I tell you it hasn't got anything to do with farming? Farming is

business, just common low-down business: that's all it is, it's all you

can say for it; but this is higher, this is religious, and totally

different."



"Religious to go and take the land away from people that owns it?"



"Certainly; it's always been considered so."



Jim he shook his head, and says:



"Mars Tom, I reckon dey's a mistake about it somers--dey mos' sholy is.

I's religious myself, en I knows plenty religious people, but I hain't

run across none dat acts like dat."



It made Tom hot, and he says:



"Well, it's enough to make a body sick, such mullet-headed ignorance! If

either of you'd read anything about history, you'd know that Richard Cur

de Loon, and the Pope, and Godfrey de Bulleyn, and lots more of the most

noble-hearted and pious people in the world, hacked and hammered at the

paynims for more than two hundred years trying to take their land away

from them, and swum neck-deep in blood the whole time--and yet here's a

couple of sap-headed country yahoos out in the backwoods of Missouri

setting themselves up to know more about the rights and wrongs of it than

they did! Talk about cheek!"



Well, of course, that put a more different light on it, and me and Jim

felt pretty cheap and ignorant, and wished we hadn't been quite so

chipper. I couldn't say nothing, and Jim he couldn't for a while; then he

says:



"Well, den, I reckon it's all right; beca'se ef dey didn't know, dey

ain't no use for po' ignorant folks like us to be trying to know; en so,

ef it's our duty, we got to go en tackle it en do de bes' we can. Same

time, I feel as sorry for dem paynims as Mars Tom. De hard part gwine to

be to kill folks dat a body hain't been 'quainted wid and dat hain't done

him no harm. Dat's it, you see. Ef we wuz to go 'mongst 'em, jist we

three, en say we's hungry, en ast 'em for a bite to eat, why, maybe dey's

jist like yuther people. Don't you reckon dey is? Why, DEY'D give it, I

know dey would, en den--"



"Then what?"



"Well, Mars Tom, my idea is like dis. It ain't no use, we CAN'T kill dem

po' strangers dat ain't doin' us no harm, till we've had practice--I

knows it perfectly well, Mars Tom--'deed I knows it perfectly well. But

ef we takes a' axe or two, jist you en me en Huck, en slips acrost de

river to-night arter de moon's gone down, en kills dat sick fam'ly dat's

over on the Sny, en burns dey house down, en--"



"Oh, you make me tired!" says Tom. "I don't want to argue any more with

people like you and Huck Finn, that's always wandering from the subject,

and ain't got any more sense than to try to reason out a thing that's

pure theology by the laws that protect real estate!"



Now that's just where Tom Sawyer warn't fair. Jim didn't mean no harm,

and I didn't mean no harm. We knowed well enough that he was right and we

was wrong, and all we was after was to get at the HOW of it, and that was

all; and the only reason he couldn't explain it so we could understand it

was because we was ignorant--yes, and pretty dull, too, I ain't denying

that; but, land! that ain't no crime, I should think.



But he wouldn't hear no more about it--just said if we had tackled the

thing in the proper spirit, he would 'a' raised a couple of thousand

knights and put them in steel armor from head to heel, and made me a

lieutenant and Jim a sutler, and took the command himself and brushed the

whole paynim outfit into the sea like flies and come back across the

world in a glory like sunset. But he said we didn't know enough to take

the chance when we had it, and he wouldn't ever offer it again. And he

didn't. When he once got set, you couldn't budge him.



But I didn't care much. I am peaceable, and don't get up rows with people

that ain't doing nothing to me. I allowed if the paynim was satisfied I

was, and we would let it stand at that.



Now Tom he got all that notion out of Walter Scott's book, which he was

always reading. And it WAS a wild notion, because in my opinion he never

could've raised the men, and if he did, as like as not he would've got

licked. I took the book and read all about it, and as near as I could

make it out, most of the folks that shook farming to go crusading had a

mighty rocky time of it.







 CHAPTER II. THE BALLOON ASCENSION



WELL, Tom got up one thing after another, but they all had tender spots

about 'em somewheres, and he had to shove 'em aside. So at last he was

about in despair. Then the St. Louis papers begun to talk a good deal

about the balloon that was going to sail to Europe, and Tom sort of

thought he wanted to go down and see what it looked like, but couldn't

make up his mind. But the papers went on talking, and so he allowed that

maybe if he didn't go he mightn't ever have another chance to see a

balloon; and next, he found out that Nat Parsons was going down to see

it, and that decided him, of course. He wasn't going to have Nat Parsons

coming back bragging about seeing the balloon, and him having to listen

to it and keep quiet. So he wanted me and Jim to go too, and we went.



It was a noble big balloon, and had wings and fans and all sorts of

things, and wasn't like any balloon you see in pictures. It was away out

toward the edge of town, in a vacant lot, corner of Twelfth street; and

there was a big crowd around it, making fun of it, and making fun of the

man,--a lean pale feller with that soft kind of moonlight in his eyes,

you know,--and they kept saying it wouldn't go. It made him hot to hear

them, and he would turn on them and shake his fist and say they was

animals and blind, but some day they would find they had stood face to

face with one of the men that lifts up nations and makes civilizations,

and was too dull to know it; and right here on this spot their own

children and grandchildren would build a monument to him that would

outlast a thousand years, but his name would outlast the monument. And

then the crowd would burst out in a laugh again, and yell at him, and ask

him what was his name before he was married, and what he would take to

not do it, and what was his sister's cat's grandmother's name, and all

the things that a crowd says when they've got hold of a feller that they

see they can plague. Well, some things they said WAS funny,--yes, and

mighty witty too, I ain't denying that,--but all the same it warn't fair

nor brave, all them people pitching on one, and they so glib and sharp,

and him without any gift of talk to answer back with. But, good land!

what did he want to sass back for? You see, it couldn't do him no good,

and it was just nuts for them. They HAD him, you know. But that was his

way. I reckon he couldn't help it; he was made so, I judge. He was a good

enough sort of cretur, and hadn't no harm in him, and was just a genius,

as the papers said, which wasn't his fault. We can't all be sound: we've

got to be the way we're made. As near as I can make out, geniuses think

they know it all, and so they won't take people's advice, but always go

their own way, which makes everybody forsake them and despise them, and

that is perfectly natural. If they was humbler, and listened and tried to

learn, it would be better for them.



The part the professor was in was like a boat, and was big and roomy, and

had water-tight lockers around the inside to keep all sorts of things in,

and a body could sit on them, and make beds on them, too. We went aboard,

and there was twenty people there, snooping around and examining, and old

Nat Parsons was there, too. The professor kept fussing around getting

ready, and the people went ashore, drifting out one at a time, and old

Nat he was the last. Of course it wouldn't do to let him go out behind

US. We mustn't budge till he was gone, so we could be last ourselves.



But he was gone now, so it was time for us to follow. I heard a big

shout, and turned around--the city was dropping from under us like a

shot! It made me sick all through, I was so scared. Jim turned gray and

couldn't say a word, and Tom didn't say nothing, but looked excited. The

city went on dropping down, and down, and down; but we didn't seem to be

doing nothing but just hang in the air and stand still. The houses got

smaller and smaller, and the city pulled itself together, closer and

closer, and the men and wagons got to looking like ants and bugs crawling

around, and the streets like threads and cracks; and then it all kind of

melted together, and there wasn't any city any more it was only a big

scar on the earth, and it seemed to me a body could see up the river and

down the river about a thousand miles, though of course it wasn't so

much. By and by the earth was a ball--just a round ball, of a dull color,

with shiny stripes wriggling and winding around over it, which was

rivers. The Widder Douglas always told me the earth was round like a

ball, but I never took any stock in a lot of them superstitions o' hers,

and of course I paid no attention to that one, because I could see myself

that the world was the shape of a plate, and flat. I used to go up on the

hill, and take a look around and prove it for myself, because I reckon

the best way to get a sure thing on a fact is to go and examine for

yourself, and not take anybody's say-so. But I had to give in now that

the widder was right. That is, she was right as to the rest of the world,

but she warn't right about the part our village is in; that part is the

shape of a plate, and flat, I take my oath!



The professor had been quiet all this time, as if he was asleep; but he

broke loose now, and he was mighty bitter. He says something like this:



"Idiots! They said it wouldn't go; and they wanted to examine it, and spy

around and get the secret of it out of me. But I beat them. Nobody knows

the secret but me. Nobody knows what makes it move but me; and it's a new

power--a new power, and a thousand times the strongest in the earth!

Steam's foolishness to it! They said I couldn't go to Europe. To Europe!

Why, there's power aboard to last five years, and feed for three months.

They are fools! What do they know about it? Yes, and they said my

air-ship was flimsy. Why, she's good for fifty years! I can sail the

skies all my life if I want to, and steer where I please, though they

laughed at that, and said I couldn't. Couldn't steer! Come here, boy;

we'll see. You press these buttons as I tell you."



He made Tom steer the ship all about and every which way, and learnt him

the whole thing in nearly no time; and Tom said it was perfectly easy. He

made him fetch the ship down 'most to the earth, and had him spin her

along so close to the Illinois prairies that a body could talk to the

farmers, and hear everything they said perfectly plain; and he flung out

printed bills to them that told about the balloon, and said it was going

to Europe. Tom got so he could steer straight for a tree till he got

nearly to it, and then dart up and skin right along over the top of it.

Yes, and he showed Tom how to land her; and he done it first-rate, too,

and set her down in the prairies as soft as wool. But the minute we

started to skip out the professor says, "No, you don't!" and shot her up

in the air again. It was awful. I begun to beg, and so did Jim; but it

only give his temper a rise, and he begun to rage around and look wild

out of his eyes, and I was scared of him.



Well, then he got on to his troubles again, and mourned and grumbled

about the way he was treated, and couldn't seem to git over it, and

especially people's saying his ship was flimsy. He scoffed at that, and

at their saying she warn't simple and would be always getting out of

order. Get out of order! That graveled him; he said that she couldn't any

more get out of order than the solar sister.



He got worse and worse, and I never see a person take on so. It give me

the cold shivers to see him, and so it did Jim. By and by he got to

yelling and screaming, and then he swore the world shouldn't ever have

his secret at all now, it had treated him so mean. He said he would sail

his balloon around the globe just to show what he could do, and then he

would sink it in the sea, and sink us all along with it, too. Well, it

was the awfulest fix to be in, and here was night coming on!



He give us something to eat, and made us go to the other end of the boat,

and he laid down on a locker, where he could boss all the works, and put

his old pepper-box revolver under his head, and said if anybody come

fooling around there trying to land her, he would kill him.



We set scrunched up together, and thought considerable, but didn't say

much--only just a word once in a while when a body had to say something

or bust, we was so scared and worried. The night dragged along slow and

lonesome. We was pretty low down, and the moonshine made everything soft

and pretty, and the farmhouses looked snug and homeful, and we could hear

the farm sounds, and wished we could be down there; but, laws! we just

slipped along over them like a ghost, and never left a track.



Away in the night, when all the sounds was late sounds, and the air had a

late feel, and a late smell, too--about a two-o'clock feel, as near as I

could make out--Tom said the professor was so quiet this time he must be

asleep, and we'd better--



"Better what?" I says in a whisper, and feeling sick all over, because I

knowed what he was thinking about.



"Better slip back there and tie him, and land the ship," he says.



I says: "No, sir! Don' you budge, Tom Sawyer."



And Jim--well, Jim was kind o' gasping, he was so scared. He says:



"Oh, Mars Tom, DON'T! Ef you teches him, we's gone--we's gone sho'! I

ain't gwine anear him, not for nothin' in dis worl'. Mars Tom, he's plumb

crazy."



Tom whispers and says--"That's WHY we've got to do something. If he

wasn't crazy I wouldn't give shucks to be anywhere but here; you couldn't

hire me to get out--now that I've got used to this balloon and over the

scare of being cut loose from the solid ground--if he was in his right

mind. But it's no good politics, sailing around like this with a person

that's out of his head, and says he's going round the world and then

drown us all. We've GOT to do something, I tell you, and do it before he

wakes up, too, or we mayn't ever get another chance. Come!"



But it made us turn cold and creepy just to think of it, and we said we

wouldn't budge. So Tom was for slipping back there by himself to see if

he couldn't get at the steering-gear and land the ship. We begged and

begged him not to, but it warn't no use; so he got down on his hands and

knees, and begun to crawl an inch at a time, we a-holding our breath and

watching. After he got to the middle of the boat he crept slower than

ever, and it did seem like years to me. But at last we see him get to the

professor's head, and sort of raise up soft and look a good spell in his

face and listen. Then we see him begin to inch along again toward the

professor's feet where the steering-buttons was. Well, he got there all

safe, and was reaching slow and steady toward the buttons, but he knocked

down something that made a noise, and we see him slump down flat an' soft

in the bottom, and lay still. The professor stirred, and says, "What's

that?" But everybody kept dead still and quiet, and he begun to mutter

and mumble and nestle, like a person that's going to wake up, and I

thought I was going to die, I was so worried and scared.



Then a cloud slid over the moon, and I 'most cried, I was so glad. She

buried herself deeper and deeper into the cloud, and it got so dark we

couldn't see Tom. Then it began to sprinkle rain, and we could hear the

professor fussing at his ropes and things and abusing the weather. We was

afraid every minute he would touch Tom, and then we would be goners, and

no help; but Tom was already on his way back, and when we felt his hands

on our knees my breath stopped sudden, and my heart fell down 'mongst my

other works, because I couldn't tell in the dark but it might be the

professor! which I thought it WAS.



Dear! I was so glad to have him back that I was just as near happy as a

person could be that was up in the air that way with a deranged man. You

can't land a balloon in the dark, and so I hoped it would keep on

raining, for I didn't want Tom to go meddling any more and make us so

awful uncomfortable. Well, I got my wish. It drizzled and drizzled along

the rest of the night, which wasn't long, though it did seem so; and at

daybreak it cleared, and the world looked mighty soft and gray and

pretty, and the forests and fields so good to see again, and the horses

and cattle standing sober and thinking. Next, the sun come a-blazing up

gay and splendid, and then we began to feel rusty and stretchy, and first

we knowed we was all asleep.







 CHAPTER III. TOM EXPLAINS



WE went to sleep about four o'clock, and woke up about eight. The

professor was setting back there at his end, looking glum. He pitched us

some breakfast, but he told us not to come abaft the midship compass.

That was about the middle of the boat. Well, when you are sharp-set, and

you eat and satisfy yourself, everything looks pretty different from what

it done before. It makes a body feel pretty near comfortable, even when

he is up in a balloon with a genius. We got to talking together.



There was one thing that kept bothering me, and by and by I says:



"Tom, didn't we start east?"



"Yes."



"How fast have we been going?"



"Well, you heard what the professor said when he was raging round.

Sometimes, he said, we was making fifty miles an hour, sometimes ninety,

sometimes a hundred; said that with a gale to help he could make three

hundred any time, and said if he wanted the gale, and wanted it blowing

the right direction, he only had to go up higher or down lower to find

it."



"Well, then, it's just as I reckoned. The professor lied."



"Why?"



"Because if we was going so fast we ought to be past Illinois, oughtn't

we?"



"Certainly."



"Well, we ain't."



"What's the reason we ain't?"



"I know by the color. We're right over Illinois yet. And you can see for

yourself that Indiana ain't in sight."



"I wonder what's the matter with you, Huck. You know by the COLOR?"



"Yes, of course I do."



"What's the color got to do with it?"



"It's got everything to do with it. Illinois is green, Indiana is pink.

You show me any pink down here, if you can. No, sir; it's green."



"Indiana PINK? Why, what a lie!"



"It ain't no lie; I've seen it on the map, and it's pink."



You never see a person so aggravated and disgusted. He says:



"Well, if I was such a numbskull as you, Huck Finn, I would jump over.

Seen it on the map! Huck Finn, did you reckon the States was the same

color out-of-doors as they are on the map?"



"Tom Sawyer, what's a map for? Ain't it to learn you facts?"



"Of course."



"Well, then, how's it going to do that if it tells lies? That's what I

want to know."



"Shucks, you muggins! It don't tell lies."



"It don't, don't it?"



"No, it don't."



"All right, then; if it don't, there ain't no two States the same color.

You git around THAT if you can, Tom Sawyer."



He see I had him, and Jim see it too; and I tell you, I felt pretty good,

for Tom Sawyer was always a hard person to git ahead of. Jim slapped his

leg and says:



"I tell YOU! dat's smart, dat's right down smart. Ain't no use, Mars Tom;

he got you DIS time, sho'!" He slapped his leg again, and says, "My LAN',

but it was smart one!"



I never felt so good in my life; and yet I didn't know I was saying

anything much till it was out. I was just mooning along, perfectly

careless, and not expecting anything was going to happen, and never

THINKING of such a thing at all, when, all of a sudden, out it came. Why,

it was just as much a surprise to me as it was to any of them. It was

just the same way it is when a person is munching along on a hunk of

corn-pone, and not thinking about anything, and all of a sudden bites

into a di'mond. Now all that HE knows first off is that it's some kind of

gravel he's bit into; but he don't find out it's a di'mond till he gits

it out and brushes off the sand and crumbs and one thing or another, and

has a look at it, and then he's surprised and glad--yes, and proud too;

though when you come to look the thing straight in the eye, he ain't

entitled to as much credit as he would 'a' been if he'd been HUNTING

di'monds. You can see the difference easy if you think it over. You see,

an accident, that way, ain't fairly as big a thing as a thing that's done

a-purpose. Anybody could find that di'mond in that corn-pone; but mind

you, it's got to be somebody that's got THAT KIND OF A CORN-PONE. That's

where that feller's credit comes in, you see; and that's where mine comes

in. I don't claim no great things--I don't reckon I could 'a' done it

again--but I done it that time; that's all I claim. And I hadn't no more

idea I could do such a thing, and warn't any more thinking about it or

trying to, than you be this minute. Why, I was just as ca'm, a body

couldn't be any ca'mer, and yet, all of a sudden, out it come. I've often

thought of that time, and I can remember just the way everything looked,

same as if it was only last week. I can see it all: beautiful rolling

country with woods and fields and lakes for hundreds and hundreds of

miles all around, and towns and villages scattered everywheres under us,

here and there and yonder; and the professor mooning over a chart on his

little table, and Tom's cap flopping in the rigging where it was hung up

to dry. And one thing in particular was a bird right alongside, not ten

foot off, going our way and trying to keep up, but losing ground all the

time; and a railroad train doing the same thing down there, sliding among

the trees and farms, and pouring out a long cloud of black smoke and now

and then a little puff of white; and when the white was gone so long you

had almost forgot it, you would hear a little faint toot, and that was

the whistle. And we left the bird and the train both behind, 'WAY behind,

and done it easy, too.



But Tom he was huffy, and said me and Jim was a couple of ignorant

blatherskites, and then he says:



"Suppose there's a brown calf and a big brown dog, and an artist is

making a picture of them. What is the MAIN thing that that artist has got

to do? He has got to paint them so you can tell them apart the minute you

look at them, hain't he? Of course. Well, then, do you want him to go and

paint BOTH of them brown? Certainly you don't. He paints one of them

blue, and then you can't make no mistake. It's just the same with the

maps. That's why they make every State a different color; it ain't to

deceive you, it's to keep you from deceiving yourself."



But I couldn't see no argument about that, and neither could Jim. Jim

shook his head, and says:



"Why, Mars Tom, if you knowed what chuckle-heads dem painters is, you'd

wait a long time before you'd fetch one er DEM in to back up a fac'. I's

gwine to tell you, den you kin see for you'self. I see one of 'em

a-paintin' away, one day, down in ole Hank Wilson's back lot, en I went

down to see, en he was paintin' dat old brindle cow wid de near horn

gone--you knows de one I means. En I ast him what he's paintin' her for,

en he say when he git her painted, de picture's wuth a hundred dollars.

Mars Tom, he could a got de cow fer fifteen, en I tole him so. Well, sah,

if you'll b'lieve me, he jes' shuck his head, dat painter did, en went on

a-dobbin'. Bless you, Mars Tom, DEY don't know nothin'."



Tom lost his temper. I notice a person 'most always does that's got laid

out in an argument. He told us to shut up, and maybe we'd feel better.

Then he see a town clock away off down yonder, and he took up the glass

and looked at it, and then looked at his silver turnip, and then at the

clock, and then at the turnip again, and says:



"That's funny! That clock's near about an hour fast."



So he put up his turnip. Then he see another clock, and took a look, and

it was an hour fast too. That puzzled him.



"That's a mighty curious thing," he says. "I don't understand it."



Then he took the glass and hunted up another clock, and sure enough it

was an hour fast too. Then his eyes began to spread and his breath to

come out kinder gaspy like, and he says:



"Ger-reat Scott, it's the LONGITUDE!"



I says, considerably scared:



"Well, what's been and gone and happened now?"



"Why, the thing that's happened is that this old bladder has slid over

Illinois and Indiana and Ohio like nothing, and this is the east end of

Pennsylvania or New York, or somewheres around there."



"Tom Sawyer, you don't mean it!"



"Yes, I do, and it's dead sure. We've covered about fifteen degrees of

longitude since we left St. Louis yesterday afternoon, and them clocks

are right. We've come close on to eight hundred miles."



I didn't believe it, but it made the cold streaks trickle down my back

just the same. In my experience I knowed it wouldn't take much short of

two weeks to do it down the Mississippi on a raft. Jim was working his

mind and studying. Pretty soon he says:



"Mars Tom, did you say dem clocks uz right?"



"Yes, they're right."



"Ain't yo' watch right, too?"



"She's right for St. Louis, but she's an hour wrong for here."



"Mars Tom, is you tryin' to let on dat de time ain't de SAME

everywheres?"



"No, it ain't the same everywheres, by a long shot."



Jim looked distressed, and says:



"It grieves me to hear you talk like dat, Mars Tom; I's right down

ashamed to hear you talk like dat, arter de way you's been raised.

Yassir, it'd break yo' Aunt Polly's heart to hear you."



Tom was astonished. He looked Jim over wondering, and didn't say nothing,

and Jim went on:



"Mars Tom, who put de people out yonder in St. Louis? De Lord done it.

Who put de people here whar we is? De Lord done it. Ain' dey bofe his

children? 'Cose dey is. WELL, den! is he gwine to SCRIMINATE 'twixt 'em?"



"Scriminate! I never heard such ignorance. There ain't no discriminating

about it. When he makes you and some more of his children black, and

makes the rest of us white, what do you call that?"



Jim see the p'int. He was stuck. He couldn't answer. Tom says:



"He does discriminate, you see, when he wants to; but this case HERE

ain't no discrimination of his, it's man's. The Lord made the day, and he

made the night; but he didn't invent the hours, and he didn't distribute

them around. Man did that."



"Mars Tom, is dat so? Man done it?"



"Certainly."



"Who tole him he could?"



"Nobody. He never asked."



Jim studied a minute, and says:



"Well, dat do beat me. I wouldn't 'a' tuck no sich resk. But some people

ain't scared o' nothin'. Dey bangs right ahead; DEY don't care what

happens. So den dey's allays an hour's diff'unce everywhah, Mars Tom?"



"An hour? No! It's four minutes difference for every degree of longitude,

you know. Fifteen of 'em's an hour, thirty of 'em's two hours, and so on.

When it's one clock Tuesday morning in England, it's eight o'clock the

night before in New York."



Jim moved a little way along the locker, and you could see he was

insulted. He kept shaking his head and muttering, and so I slid along to

him and patted him on the leg, and petted him up, and got him over the

worst of his feelings, and then he says:



"Mars Tom talkin' sich talk as dat! Choosday in one place en Monday in

t'other, bofe in the same day! Huck, dis ain't no place to joke--up here

whah we is. Two days in one day! How you gwine to get two days inter one

day? Can't git two hours inter one hour, kin you? Can't git two niggers

inter one nigger skin, kin you? Can't git two gallons of whisky inter a

one-gallon jug, kin you? No, sir, 'twould strain de jug. Yes, en even den

you couldn't, I don't believe. Why, looky here, Huck, s'posen de Choosday

was New Year's--now den! is you gwine to tell me it's dis year in one

place en las' year in t'other, bofe in de identical same minute? It's de

beatenest rubbage! I can't stan' it--I can't stan' to hear tell 'bout

it." Then he begun to shiver and turn gray, and Tom says:



"NOW what's the matter? What's the trouble?"



Jim could hardly speak, but he says:



"Mars Tom, you ain't jokin', en it's SO?"



"No, I'm not, and it is so."



Jim shivered again, and says:



"Den dat Monday could be de las' day, en dey wouldn't be no las' day in

England, en de dead wouldn't be called. We mustn't go over dah, Mars Tom.

Please git him to turn back; I wants to be whah--"



All of a sudden we see something, and all jumped up, and forgot

everything and begun to gaze. Tom says:



"Ain't that the--" He catched his breath, then says: "It IS, sure as you

live! It's the ocean!"



That made me and Jim catch our breath, too. Then we all stood petrified

but happy, for none of us had ever seen an ocean, or ever expected to.

Tom kept muttering:



"Atlantic Ocean--Atlantic. Land, don't it sound great! And that's IT--and

WE are looking at it--we! Why, it's just too splendid to believe!"



Then we see a big bank of black smoke; and when we got nearer, it was a

city--and a monster she was, too, with a thick fringe of ships around one

edge; and we wondered if it was New York, and begun to jaw and dispute

about it, and, first we knowed, it slid from under us and went flying

behind, and here we was, out over the very ocean itself, and going like a

cyclone. Then we woke up, I tell you!



We made a break aft and raised a wail, and begun to beg the professor to

turn back and land us, but he jerked out his pistol and motioned us back,

and we went, but nobody will ever know how bad we felt.



The land was gone, all but a little streak, like a snake, away off on the

edge of the water, and down under us was just ocean, ocean,

ocean--millions of miles of it, heaving and pitching and squirming, and

white sprays blowing from the wave-tops, and only a few ships in sight,

wallowing around and laying over, first on one side and then on t'other,

and sticking their bows under and then their sterns; and before long

there warn't no ships at all, and we had the sky and the whole ocean all

to ourselves, and the roomiest place I ever see and the lonesomest.







 CHAPTER IV. STORM



AND it got lonesomer and lonesomer. There was the big sky up there, empty

and awful deep; and the ocean down there without a thing on it but just

the waves. All around us was a ring, where the sky and the water come

together; yes, a monstrous big ring it was, and we right in the dead

center of it--plumb in the center. We was racing along like a prairie

fire, but it never made any difference, we couldn't seem to git past that

center no way. I couldn't see that we ever gained an inch on that ring.

It made a body feel creepy, it was so curious and unaccountable.



Well, everything was so awful still that we got to talking in a very low

voice, and kept on getting creepier and lonesomer and less and less

talky, till at last the talk ran dry altogether, and we just set there

and "thunk," as Jim calls it, and never said a word the longest time.



The professor never stirred till the sun was overhead, then he stood up

and put a kind of triangle to his eye, and Tom said it was a sextant and

he was taking the sun to see whereabouts the balloon was. Then he

ciphered a little and looked in a book, and then he begun to carry on

again. He said lots of wild things, and, among others, he said he would

keep up this hundred-mile gait till the middle of to-morrow afternoon,

and then he'd land in London.



We said we would be humbly thankful.



He was turning away, but he whirled around when we said that, and give us

a long look of his blackest kind--one of the maliciousest and

suspiciousest looks I ever see. Then he says:



"You want to leave me. Don't try to deny it."



We didn't know what to say, so we held in and didn't say nothing at all.



He went aft and set down, but he couldn't seem to git that thing out of

his mind. Every now and then he would rip out something about it, and try

to make us answer him, but we dasn't.



It got lonesomer and lonesomer right along, and it did seem to me I

couldn't stand it. It was still worse when night begun to come on. By and

by Tom pinched me and whispers:



"Look!"



I took a glance aft, and see the professor taking a whet out of a bottle.

I didn't like the looks of that. By and by he took another drink, and

pretty soon he begun to sing. It was dark now, and getting black and

stormy. He went on singing, wilder and wilder, and the thunder begun to

mutter, and the wind to wheeze and moan among the ropes, and altogether

it was awful. It got so black we couldn't see him any more, and wished we

couldn't hear him, but we could. Then he got still; but he warn't still

ten minutes till we got suspicious, and wished he would start up his

noise again, so we could tell where he was. By and by there was a flash

of lightning, and we see him start to get up, but he staggered and fell

down. We heard him scream out in the dark:



"They don't want to go to England. All right, I'll change the course.

They want to leave me. I know they do. Well, they shall--and NOW!"



I 'most died when he said that. Then he was still again--still so long I

couldn't bear it, and it did seem to me the lightning wouldn't EVER come

again. But at last there was a blessed flash, and there he was, on his

hands and knees crawling, and not four feet from us. My, but his eyes was

terrible! He made a lunge for Tom, and says, "Overboard YOU go!" but it

was already pitch-dark again, and I couldn't see whether he got him or

not, and Tom didn't make a sound.



There was another long, horrible wait; then there was a flash, and I see

Tom's head sink down outside the boat and disappear. He was on the

rope-ladder that dangled down in the air from the gunnel. The professor

let off a shout and jumped for him, and straight off it was pitch-dark

again, and Jim groaned out, "Po' Mars Tom, he's a goner!" and made a jump

for the professor, but the professor warn't there.



Then we heard a couple of terrible screams, and then another not so loud,

and then another that was 'way below, and you could only JUST hear it;

and I heard Jim say, "Po' Mars Tom!"



Then it was awful still, and I reckon a person could 'a' counted four

thousand before the next flash come. When it come I see Jim on his knees,

with his arms on the locker and his face buried in them, and he was

crying. Before I could look over the edge it was all dark again, and I

was glad, because I didn't want to see. But when the next flash come, I

was watching, and down there I see somebody a-swinging in the wind on the

ladder, and it was Tom!



"Come up!" I shouts; "come up, Tom!"



His voice was so weak, and the wind roared so, I couldn't make out what

he said, but I thought he asked was the professor up there. I shouts:



"No, he's down in the ocean! Come up! Can we help you?"



Of course, all this in the dark.



"Huck, who is you hollerin' at?"



"I'm hollerin' at Tom."



"Oh, Huck, how kin you act so, when you know po' Mars Tom--" Then he let

off an awful scream, and flung his head and his arms back and let off

another one, because there was a white glare just then, and he had raised

up his face just in time to see Tom's, as white as snow, rise above the

gunnel and look him right in the eye. He thought it was Tom's ghost, you

see.



Tom clumb aboard, and when Jim found it WAS him, and not his ghost, he

hugged him, and called him all sorts of loving names, and carried on like

he was gone crazy, he was so glad. Says I:



"What did you wait for, Tom? Why didn't you come up at first?"



"I dasn't, Huck. I knowed somebody plunged down past me, but I didn't

know who it was in the dark. It could 'a' been you, it could 'a' been

Jim."



That was the way with Tom Sawyer--always sound. He warn't coming up till

he knowed where the professor was.



The storm let go about this time with all its might; and it was dreadful

the way the thunder boomed and tore, and the lightning glared out, and

the wind sung and screamed in the rigging, and the rain come down. One

second you couldn't see your hand before you, and the next you could

count the threads in your coat-sleeve, and see a whole wide desert of

waves pitching and tossing through a kind of veil of rain. A storm like

that is the loveliest thing there is, but it ain't at its best when you

are up in the sky and lost, and it's wet and lonesome, and there's just

been a death in the family.



We set there huddled up in the bow, and talked low about the poor

professor; and everybody was sorry for him, and sorry the world had made

fun of him and treated him so harsh, when he was doing the best he could,

and hadn't a friend nor nobody to encourage him and keep him from

brooding his mind away and going deranged. There was plenty of clothes

and blankets and everything at the other end, but we thought we'd ruther

take the rain than go meddling back there.







 CHAPTER V. LAND



WE tried to make some plans, but we couldn't come to no agreement. Me and

Jim was for turning around and going back home, but Tom allowed that by

the time daylight come, so we could see our way, we would be so far

toward England that we might as well go there, and come back in a ship,

and have the glory of saying we done it.



About midnight the storm quit and the moon come out and lit up the ocean,

and we begun to feel comfortable and drowsy; so we stretched out on the

lockers and went to sleep, and never woke up again till sun-up. The sea

was sparkling like di'monds, and it was nice weather, and pretty soon our

things was all dry again.



We went aft to find some breakfast, and the first thing we noticed was

that there was a dim light burning in a compass back there under a hood.

Then Tom was disturbed. He says:



"You know what that means, easy enough. It means that somebody has got to

stay on watch and steer this thing the same as he would a ship, or she'll

wander around and go wherever the wind wants her to."



"Well," I says, "what's she been doing since--er--since we had the

accident?"



"Wandering," he says, kinder troubled--"wandering, without any doubt.

She's in a wind now that's blowing her south of east. We don't know how

long that's been going on, either."



So then he p'inted her east, and said he would hold her there till we

rousted out the breakfast. The professor had laid in everything a body

could want; he couldn't 'a' been better fixed. There wasn't no milk for

the coffee, but there was water, and everything else you could want, and

a charcoal stove and the fixings for it, and pipes and cigars and

matches; and wine and liquor, which warn't in our line; and books, and

maps, and charts, and an accordion; and furs, and blankets, and no end of

rubbish, like brass beads and brass jewelry, which Tom said was a sure

sign that he had an idea of visiting among savages. There was money, too.

Yes, the professor was well enough fixed.



After breakfast Tom learned me and Jim how to steer, and divided us all

up into four-hour watches, turn and turn about; and when his watch was

out I took his place, and he got out the professor's papers and pens and

wrote a letter home to his aunt Polly, telling her everything that had

happened to us, and dated it "IN THE WELKIN, APPROACHING ENGLAND," and

folded it together and stuck it fast with a red wafer, and directed it,

and wrote above the direction, in big writing, "FROM TOM SAWYER, THE

ERRONORT," and said it would stump old Nat Parsons, the postmaster, when

it come along in the mail. I says:



"Tom Sawyer, this ain't no welkin, it's a balloon."



"Well, now, who SAID it was a welkin, smarty?"



"You've wrote it on the letter, anyway."



"What of it? That don't mean that the balloon's the welkin."



"Oh, I thought it did. Well, then, what is a welkin?"



I see in a minute he was stuck. He raked and scraped around in his mind,

but he couldn't find nothing, so he had to say:



"I don't know, and nobody don't know. It's just a word, and it's a mighty

good word, too. There ain't many that lays over it. I don't believe

there's ANY that does."



"Shucks!" I says. "But what does it MEAN?--that's the p'int."



"I don't know what it means, I tell you. It's a word that people uses

for--for--well, it's ornamental. They don't put ruffles on a shirt to

keep a person warm, do they?"



"Course they don't."



"But they put them ON, don't they?"



"Yes."



"All right, then; that letter I wrote is a shirt, and the welkin's the

ruffle on it."



I judged that that would gravel Jim, and it did.



"Now, Mars Tom, it ain't no use to talk like dat; en, moreover, it's

sinful. You knows a letter ain't no shirt, en dey ain't no ruffles on it,

nuther. Dey ain't no place to put 'em on; you can't put em on, and dey

wouldn't stay ef you did."



"Oh DO shut up, and wait till something's started that you know something

about."



"Why, Mars Tom, sholy you can't mean to say I don't know about shirts,

when, goodness knows, I's toted home de washin' ever sence--"



"I tell you, this hasn't got anything to do with shirts. I only--"



"Why, Mars Tom, you said yo'self dat a letter--"



"Do you want to drive me crazy? Keep still. I only used it as a

metaphor."



That word kinder bricked us up for a minute. Then Jim says--rather timid,

because he see Tom was getting pretty tetchy:



"Mars Tom, what is a metaphor?"



"A metaphor's a--well, it's a--a--a metaphor's an illustration." He see

THAT didn't git home, so he tried again. "When I say birds of a feather

flocks together, it's a metaphorical way of saying--"



"But dey DON'T, Mars Tom. No, sir, 'deed dey don't. Dey ain't no feathers

dat's more alike den a bluebird en a jaybird, but ef you waits till you

catches dem birds together, you'll--"



"Oh, give us a rest! You can't get the simplest little thing through your

thick skull. Now don't bother me any more."



Jim was satisfied to stop. He was dreadful pleased with himself for

catching Tom out. The minute Tom begun to talk about birds I judged he

was a goner, because Jim knowed more about birds than both of us put

together. You see, he had killed hundreds and hundreds of them, and

that's the way to find out about birds. That's the way people does that

writes books about birds, and loves them so that they'll go hungry and

tired and take any amount of trouble to find a new bird and kill it.

Their name is ornithologers, and I could have been an ornithologer

myself, because I always loved birds and creatures; and I started out to

learn how to be one, and I see a bird setting on a limb of a high tree,

singing with its head tilted back and its mouth open, and before I

thought I fired, and his song stopped and he fell straight down from the

limb, all limp like a rag, and I run and picked him up and he was dead,

and his body was warm in my hand, and his head rolled about this way and

that, like his neck was broke, and there was a little white skin over his

eyes, and one little drop of blood on the side of his head; and, laws! I

couldn't see nothing more for the tears; and I hain't never murdered no

creature since that warn't doing me no harm, and I ain't going to.



But I was aggravated about that welkin. I wanted to know. I got the

subject up again, and then Tom explained, the best he could. He said when

a person made a big speech the newspapers said the shouts of the people

made the welkin ring. He said they always said that, but none of them

ever told what it was, so he allowed it just meant outdoors and up high.

Well, that seemed sensible enough, so I was satisfied, and said so. That

pleased Tom and put him in a good humor again, and he says:



"Well, it's all right, then; and we'll let bygones be bygones. I don't

know for certain what a welkin is, but when we land in London we'll make

it ring, anyway, and don't you forget it."



He said an erronort was a person who sailed around in balloons; and said

it was a mighty sight finer to be Tom Sawyer the Erronort than to be Tom

Sawyer the Traveler, and we would be heard of all round the world, if we

pulled through all right, and so he wouldn't give shucks to be a traveler

now.



Toward the middle of the afternoon we got everything ready to land, and

we felt pretty good, too, and proud; and we kept watching with the

glasses, like Columbus discovering America. But we couldn't see nothing

but ocean. The afternoon wasted out and the sun shut down, and still

there warn't no land anywheres. We wondered what was the matter, but

reckoned it would come out all right, so we went on steering east, but

went up on a higher level so we wouldn't hit any steeples or mountains in

the dark.



It was my watch till midnight, and then it was Jim's; but Tom stayed up,

because he said ship captains done that when they was making the land,

and didn't stand no regular watch.



Well, when daylight come, Jim give a shout, and we jumped up and looked

over, and there was the land sure enough--land all around, as far as you

could see, and perfectly level and yaller. We didn't know how long we'd

been over it. There warn't no trees, nor hills, nor rocks, nor towns, and

Tom and Jim had took it for the sea. They took it for the sea in a dead

ca'm; but we was so high up, anyway, that if it had been the sea and

rough, it would 'a' looked smooth, all the same, in the night, that way.



We was all in a powerful excitement now, and grabbed the glasses and

hunted everywheres for London, but couldn't find hair nor hide of it, nor

any other settlement--nor any sign of a lake or a river, either. Tom was

clean beat. He said it warn't his notion of England; he thought England

looked like America, and always had that idea. So he said we better have

breakfast, and then drop down and inquire the quickest way to London. We

cut the breakfast pretty short, we was so impatient. As we slanted along

down, the weather began to moderate, and pretty soon we shed our furs.

But it kept ON moderating, and in a precious little while it was 'most

too moderate. We was close down now, and just blistering!



We settled down to within thirty foot of the land--that is, it was land

if sand is land; for this wasn't anything but pure sand. Tom and me clumb

down the ladder and took a run to stretch our legs, and it felt amazing

good--that is, the stretching did, but the sand scorched our feet like

hot embers. Next, we see somebody coming, and started to meet him; but we

heard Jim shout, and looked around and he was fairly dancing, and making

signs, and yelling. We couldn't make out what he said, but we was scared

anyway, and begun to heel it back to the balloon. When we got close

enough, we understood the words, and they made me sick:



"Run! Run fo' yo' life! Hit's a lion; I kin see him thoo de glass! Run,

boys; do please heel it de bes' you kin. He's bu'sted outen de menagerie,

en dey ain't nobody to stop him!"



It made Tom fly, but it took the stiffening all out of my legs. I could

only just gasp along the way you do in a dream when there's a ghost

gaining on you.



Tom got to the ladder and shinned up it a piece and waited for me; and as

soon as I got a foothold on it he shouted to Jim to soar away. But Jim

had clean lost his head, and said he had forgot how. So Tom shinned along

up and told me to follow; but the lion was arriving, fetching a most

ghastly roar with every lope, and my legs shook so I dasn't try to take

one of them out of the rounds for fear the other one would give way under

me.



But Tom was aboard by this time, and he started the balloon up a little,

and stopped it again as soon as the end of the ladder was ten or twelve

feet above ground. And there was the lion, a-ripping around under me, and

roaring and springing up in the air at the ladder, and only missing it

about a quarter of an inch, it seemed to me. It was delicious to be out

of his reach, perfectly delicious, and made me feel good and thankful all

up one side; but I was hanging there helpless and couldn't climb, and

that made me feel perfectly wretched and miserable all down the other. It

is most seldom that a person feels so mixed like that; and it is not to

be recommended, either.



Tom asked me what he'd better do, but I didn't know. He asked me if I

could hold on whilst he sailed away to a safe place and left the lion

behind. I said I could if he didn't go no higher than he was now; but if

he went higher I would lose my head and fall, sure. So he said, "Take a

good grip," and he started.



"Don't go so fast," I shouted. "It makes my head swim."



He had started like a lightning express. He slowed down, and we glided

over the sand slower, but still in a kind of sickening way; for it IS

uncomfortable to see things sliding and gliding under you like that, and

not a sound.



But pretty soon there was plenty of sound, for the lion was catching up.

His noise fetched others. You could see them coming on the lope from

every direction, and pretty soon there was a couple of dozen of them

under me, jumping up at the ladder and snarling and snapping at each

other; and so we went skimming along over the sand, and these fellers

doing what they could to help us to not forgit the occasion; and then

some other beasts come, without an invite, and they started a regular

riot down there.



We see this plan was a mistake. We couldn't ever git away from them at

this gait, and I couldn't hold on forever. So Tom took a think, and

struck another idea. That was, to kill a lion with the pepper-box

revolver, and then sail away while the others stopped to fight over the

carcass. So he stopped the balloon still, and done it, and then we sailed

off while the fuss was going on, and come down a quarter of a mile off,

and they helped me aboard; but by the time we was out of reach again,

that gang was on hand once more. And when they see we was really gone and

they couldn't get us, they sat down on their hams and looked up at us so

kind of disappointed that it was as much as a person could do not to see

THEIR side of the matter.







 CHAPTER VI. IT'S A CARAVAN



I WAS so weak that the only thing I wanted was a chance to lay down, so I

made straight for my locker-bunk, and stretched myself out there. But a

body couldn't get back his strength in no such oven as that, so Tom give

the command to soar, and Jim started her aloft.



We had to go up a mile before we struck comfortable weather where it was

breezy and pleasant and just right, and pretty soon I was all straight

again. Tom had been setting quiet and thinking; but now he jumps up and

says:



"I bet you a thousand to one I know where we are. We're in the Great

Sahara, as sure as guns!"



He was so excited he couldn't hold still; but I wasn't. I says:



"Well, then, where's the Great Sahara? In England or in Scotland?"



"'Tain't in either; it's in Africa."



Jim's eyes bugged out, and he begun to stare down with no end of

interest, because that was where his originals come from; but I didn't

more than half believe it. I couldn't, you know; it seemed too awful far

away for us to have traveled.



But Tom was full of his discovery, as he called it, and said the lions

and the sand meant the Great Desert, sure. He said he could 'a' found

out, before we sighted land, that we was crowding the land somewheres, if

he had thought of one thing; and when we asked him what, he said:



"These clocks. They're chronometers. You always read about them in sea

voyages. One of them is keeping Grinnage time, and the other is keeping

St. Louis time, like my watch. When we left St. Louis it was four in the

afternoon by my watch and this clock, and it was ten at night by this

Grinnage clock. Well, at this time of the year the sun sets at about

seven o'clock. Now I noticed the time yesterday evening when the sun went

down, and it was half-past five o'clock by the Grinnage clock, and half

past 11 A.M. by my watch and the other clock. You see, the sun rose and

set by my watch in St. Louis, and the Grinnage clock was six hours fast;

but we've come so far east that it comes within less than half an hour of

setting by the Grinnage clock now, and I'm away out--more than four

hours and a half out. You see, that meant that we was closing up on the

longitude of Ireland, and would strike it before long if we was p'inted

right--which we wasn't. No, sir, we've been a-wandering--wandering 'way

down south of east, and it's my opinion we are in Africa. Look at this

map. You see how the shoulder of Africa sticks out to the west. Think how

fast we've traveled; if we had gone straight east we would be long past

England by this time. You watch for noon, all of you, and we'll stand up,

and when we can't cast a shadow we'll find that this Grinnage clock is

coming mighty close to marking twelve. Yes, sir, I think we're in Africa;

and it's just bully."



Jim was gazing down with the glass. He shook his head and says:



"Mars Tom, I reckon dey's a mistake som'er's, hain't seen no niggers

yit."



"That's nothing; they don't live in the desert. What is that, 'way off

yonder? Gimme a glass."



He took a long look, and said it was like a black string stretched across

the sand, but he couldn't guess what it was.



"Well," I says, "I reckon maybe you've got a chance now to find out

whereabouts this balloon is, because as like as not that is one of these

lines here, that's on the map, that you call meridians of longitude, and

we can drop down and look at its number, and--"



"Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, I never see such a lunkhead as you. Did you

s'pose there's meridians of longitude on the EARTH?"



"Tom Sawyer, they're set down on the map, and you know it perfectly well,

and here they are, and you can see for yourself."



"Of course they're on the map, but that's nothing; there ain't any on the

GROUND."



"Tom, do you know that to be so?"



"Certainly I do."



"Well, then, that map's a liar again. I never see such a liar as that

map."



He fired up at that, and I was ready for him, and Jim was warming his

opinion, too, and next minute we'd 'a' broke loose on another argument,

if Tom hadn't dropped the glass and begun to clap his hands like a maniac

and sing out:



"Camels!--Camels!"



So I grabbed a glass and Jim, too, and took a look, but I was

disappointed, and says:



"Camels your granny; they're spiders."



"Spiders in a desert, you shad? Spiders walking in a procession? You

don't ever reflect, Huck Finn, and I reckon you really haven't got

anything to reflect WITH. Don't you know we're as much as a mile up in

the air, and that that string of crawlers is two or three miles away?

Spiders, good land! Spiders as big as a cow? Perhaps you'd like to go

down and milk one of 'em. But they're camels, just the same. It's a

caravan, that's what it is, and it's a mile long."



"Well, then, let's go down and look at it. I don't believe in it, and

ain't going to till I see it and know it."



"All right," he says, and give the command:



"Lower away."



As we come slanting down into the hot weather, we could see that it was

camels, sure enough, plodding along, an everlasting string of them, with

bales strapped to them, and several hundred men in long white robes, and

a thing like a shawl bound over their heads and hanging down with tassels

and fringes; and some of the men had long guns and some hadn't, and some

was riding and some was walking. And the weather--well, it was just

roasting. And how slow they did creep along! We swooped down now, all of

a sudden, and stopped about a hundred yards over their heads.



The men all set up a yell, and some of them fell flat on their stomachs,

some begun to fire their guns at us, and the rest broke and scampered

every which way, and so did the camels.



We see that we was making trouble, so we went up again about a mile, to

the cool weather, and watched them from there. It took them an hour to

get together and form the procession again; then they started along, but

we could see by the glasses that they wasn't paying much attention to

anything but us. We poked along, looking down at them with the glasses,

and by and by we see a big sand mound, and something like people the

other side of it, and there was something like a man laying on top of the

mound that raised his head up every now and then, and seemed to be

watching the caravan or us, we didn't know which. As the caravan got

nearer, he sneaked down on the other side and rushed to the other men and

horses--for that is what they was--and we see them mount in a hurry; and

next, here they come, like a house afire, some with lances and some with

long guns, and all of them yelling the best they could.



They come a-tearing down on to the caravan, and the next minute both

sides crashed together and was all mixed up, and there was such another

popping of guns as you never heard, and the air got so full of smoke you

could only catch glimpses of them struggling together. There must 'a'

been six hundred men in that battle, and it was terrible to see. Then

they broke up into gangs and groups, fighting tooth and nail, and

scurrying and scampering around, and laying into each other like

everything; and whenever the smoke cleared a little you could see dead

and wounded people and camels scattered far and wide and all about, and

camels racing off in every direction.



At last the robbers see they couldn't win, so their chief sounded a

signal, and all that was left of them broke away and went scampering

across the plain. The last man to go snatched up a child and carried it

off in front of him on his horse, and a woman run screaming and begging

after him, and followed him away off across the plain till she was

separated a long ways from her people; but it warn't no use, and she had

to give it up, and we see her sink down on the sand and cover her face

with her hands. Then Tom took the hellum, and started for that yahoo, and

we come a-whizzing down and made a swoop, and knocked him out of the

saddle, child and all; and he was jarred considerable, but the child

wasn't hurt, but laid there working its hands and legs in the air like a

tumble-bug that's on its back and can't turn over. The man went

staggering off to overtake his horse, and didn't know what had hit him,

for we was three or four hundred yards up in the air by this time.



We judged the woman would go and get the child now; but she didn't. We

could see her, through the glass, still setting there, with her head

bowed down on her knees; so of course she hadn't seen the performance,

and thought her child was clean gone with the man. She was nearly a half

a mile from her people, so we thought we might go down to the child,

which was about a quarter of a mile beyond her, and snake it to her

before the caravan people could git to us to do us any harm; and besides,

we reckoned they had enough business on their hands for one while,

anyway, with the wounded. We thought we'd chance it, and we did. We

swooped down and stopped, and Jim shinned down the ladder and fetched up

the kid, which was a nice fat little thing, and in a noble good humor,

too, considering it was just out of a battle and been tumbled off of a

horse; and then we started for the mother, and stopped back of her and

tolerable near by, and Jim slipped down and crept up easy, and when he

was close back of her the child goo-goo'd, the way a child does, and she

heard it, and whirled and fetched a shriek of joy, and made a jump for

the kid and snatched it and hugged it, and dropped it and hugged Jim, and

then snatched off a gold chain and hung it around Jim's neck, and hugged

him again, and jerked up the child again, a-sobbing and glorifying all

the time; and Jim he shoved for the ladder and up it, and in a minute we

was back up in the sky and the woman was staring up, with the back of her

head between her shoulders and the child with its arms locked around her

neck. And there she stood, as long as we was in sight a-sailing away in

the sky.







 CHAPTER VII. TOM RESPECTS THE FLEA



"NOON!" says Tom, and so it was. His shadder was just a blot around his

feet. We looked, and the Grinnage clock was so close to twelve the

difference didn't amount to nothing. So Tom said London was right north

of us or right south of us, one or t'other, and he reckoned by the

weather and the sand and the camels it was north; and a good many miles

north, too; as many as from New York to the city of Mexico, he guessed.



Jim said he reckoned a balloon was a good deal the fastest thing in the

world, unless it might be some kinds of birds--a wild pigeon, maybe, or a

railroad.



But Tom said he had read about railroads in England going nearly a

hundred miles an hour for a little ways, and there never was a bird in

the world that could do that--except one, and that was a flea.



"A flea? Why, Mars Tom, in de fust place he ain't a bird, strickly

speakin'--"



"He ain't a bird, eh? Well, then, what is he?"



"I don't rightly know, Mars Tom, but I speck he's only jist a' animal.

No, I reckon dat won't do, nuther, he ain't big enough for a' animal. He

mus' be a bug. Yassir, dat's what he is, he's a bug."



"I bet he ain't, but let it go. What's your second place?"



"Well, in de second place, birds is creturs dat goes a long ways, but a

flea don't."



"He don't, don't he? Come, now, what IS a long distance, if you know?"



"Why, it's miles, and lots of 'em--anybody knows dat."



"Can't a man walk miles?"



"Yassir, he kin."



"As many as a railroad?"



"Yassir, if you give him time."



"Can't a flea?"



"Well--I s'pose so--ef you gives him heaps of time."



"Now you begin to see, don't you, that DISTANCE ain't the thing to judge

by, at all; it's the time it takes to go the distance IN that COUNTS,

ain't it?"



"Well, hit do look sorter so, but I wouldn't 'a' b'lieved it, Mars Tom."



"It's a matter of PROPORTION, that's what it is; and when you come to

gauge a thing's speed by its size, where's your bird and your man and

your railroad, alongside of a flea? The fastest man can't run more than

about ten miles in an hour--not much over ten thousand times his own

length. But all the books says any common ordinary third-class flea can

jump a hundred and fifty times his own length; yes, and he can make five

jumps a second too--seven hundred and fifty times his own length, in one

little second--for he don't fool away any time stopping and starting--he

does them both at the same time; you'll see, if you try to put your

finger on him. Now that's a common, ordinary, third-class flea's gait;

but you take an Eyetalian FIRST-class, that's been the pet of the

nobility all his life, and hasn't ever knowed what want or sickness or

exposure was, and he can jump more than three hundred times his own

length, and keep it up all day, five such jumps every second, which is

fifteen hundred times his own length. Well, suppose a man could go

fifteen hundred times his own length in a second--say, a mile and a half.

It's ninety miles a minute; it's considerable more than five thousand

miles an hour. Where's your man NOW?--yes, and your bird, and your

railroad, and your balloon? Laws, they don't amount to shucks 'longside

of a flea. A flea is just a comet b'iled down small."



Jim was a good deal astonished, and so was I. Jim said:



"Is dem figgers jist edjackly true, en no jokin' en no lies, Mars Tom?"



"Yes, they are; they're perfectly true."



"Well, den, honey, a body's got to respec' a flea. I ain't had no respec'

for um befo', sca'sely, but dey ain't no gittin' roun' it, dey do deserve

it, dat's certain."



"Well, I bet they do. They've got ever so much more sense, and brains,

and brightness, in proportion to their size, than any other cretur in the

world. A person can learn them 'most anything; and they learn it quicker

than any other cretur, too. They've been learnt to haul little carriages

in harness, and go this way and that way and t'other way according to

their orders; yes, and to march and drill like soldiers, doing it as

exact, according to orders, as soldiers does it. They've been learnt to

do all sorts of hard and troublesome things. S'pose you could cultivate a

flea up to the size of a man, and keep his natural smartness a-growing

and a-growing right along up, bigger and bigger, and keener and keener,

in the same proportion--where'd the human race be, do you reckon? That

flea would be President of the United States, and you couldn't any more

prevent it than you can prevent lightning."



"My lan', Mars Tom, I never knowed dey was so much TO de beas'. No, sir,

I never had no idea of it, and dat's de fac'."



"There's more to him, by a long sight, than there is to any other cretur,

man or beast, in proportion to size. He's the interestingest of them all.

People have so much to say about an ant's strength, and an elephant's,

and a locomotive's. Shucks, they don't begin with a flea. He can lift two

or three hundred times his own weight. And none of them can come anywhere

near it. And, moreover, he has got notions of his own, and is very

particular, and you can't fool him; his instinct, or his judgment, or

whatever it is, is perfectly sound and clear, and don't ever make a

mistake. People think all humans are alike to a flea. It ain't so.

There's folks that he won't go near, hungry or not hungry, and I'm one of

them. I've never had one of them on me in my life."



"Mars Tom!"



"It's so; I ain't joking."



"Well, sah, I hain't ever heard de likes o' dat befo'." Jim couldn't

believe it, and I couldn't; so we had to drop down to the sand and git a

supply and see. Tom was right. They went for me and Jim by the thousand,

but not a one of them lit on Tom. There warn't no explaining it, but

there it was and there warn't no getting around it. He said it had always

been just so, and he'd just as soon be where there was a million of them

as not; they'd never touch him nor bother him.



We went up to the cold weather to freeze 'em out, and stayed a little

spell, and then come back to the comfortable weather and went lazying

along twenty or twenty-five miles an hour, the way we'd been doing for

the last few hours. The reason was, that the longer we was in that

solemn, peaceful desert, the more the hurry and fuss got kind of soothed

