

DEAR JOE,--...... I wish you could get a day off and make those two or

three Californians buy those privileges, for I'm going to need money

before long.



I don't know where the Senator is; but out on the Coast I reckon.



I guess we've got a perfect machine at last.  We never break a type, now,

and the new device for enabling the operator to touch the last letters

and justify the line simultaneously works, to a charm.

                         With love to you both,

                                                  MARK





     The year closed gloomily enough.  The type-setter seemed to be

     perfected, but capital for its manufacture was not forthcoming.

     The publishing business of Charles L. Webster & Co. was returning

     little or no profit.  Clemens's mother had died in Keokuk at the end

     of October, and his wife's mother, in Elmira a month later.  Mark

     Twain, writing a short business letter to his publishing manager,

     Fred J. Ball, closed it: "Merry Xmas to you!--and I wish to God I

     could have one myself before I die."









XXXI



LETTERS, 1891, TO HOWELLS, MRS. CLEMENS AND OTHERS.

RETURN TO LITERATURE.  AMERICAN CLAIMANT.  LEAVING HARTFORD.

EUROPE.  DOWN THE RHINE



Clemens was still not without hope in the machine, at the beginning of

the new year (1891) but it was a hope no longer active, and it presently

became a moribund.  Jones, on about the middle of February, backed out

altogether, laying the blame chiefly on Mackay and the others, who, he

said, had decided not to invest.  Jones "let his victim down easy" with

friendly words, but it was the end, for the present, at least, of machine

financiering.



It was also the end of Mark Twain's capital.  His publishing business was

not good.  It was already in debt and needing more money.  There was just

one thing for him to do and he did it at once, not stopping to cry over

spilt milk, but with good courage and the old enthusiasm that never

failed him, he returned to the trade of authorship.  He dug out

half-finished articles and stories, finished them and sold them, and

within a week after the Jones collapse he was at work on a novel based an

the old Sellers idea, which eight years before he and Howells had worked

into a play.  The brief letter in which he reported this news to Howells

bears no marks of depression, though the writer of it was in his

fifty-sixth year; he was by no means well, and his financial prospects

were anything but golden.





                       To W. D. Howells, in Boston:



                                             HARTFORD, Feb. 24, '91

DEAR HOWELLS,--Mrs. Clemens has been sick abed for near two weeks, but is

up and around the room now, and gaining.  I don't know whether she has

written Mrs. Howells or not--I only know she was going to--and will yet,

if she hasn't.  We are promising ourselves a whole world of pleasure in

the visit, and you mustn't dream of disappointing us.



Does this item stir an interest in you?  Began a novel four days ago, and

this moment finished chapter four.  Title of the book



                       "Colonel Mulberry Sellers.

                           American Claimant

                                 Of the

                       Great Earldom of Rossmore'

                                 in the

                       Peerage of Great Britain."



                                        Ys Ever

                                                  MARK.





Probably Mark Twain did not return to literary work reluctantly.  He had

always enjoyed writing and felt now that he was equipped better than ever

for authorship, at least so far as material was concerned.  There exists

a fragmentary copy of a letter to some unknown correspondent, in which he

recites his qualifications.  It bears evidence of having been written

just at this time and is of unusual interest at this point.





                   Fragment of Letter to -------, 1891:



.  .  .  .  I confine myself to life with which I am familiar when

pretending to portray life.  But I confined myself to the boy-life out on

the Mississippi because that had a peculiar charm for me, and not because

I was not familiar with other phases of life.  I was a soldier two weeks

once in the beginning of the war, and was hunted like a rat the whole

time.  Familiar?  My splendid Kipling himself hasn't a more burnt-in,

hard-baked, and unforgetable familiarity with that death-on-the-pale-

horse-with-hell-following-after, which is a raw soldier's first fortnight

in the field--and which, without any doubt, is the most tremendous

fortnight and the vividest he is ever going to see.



Yes, and I have shoveled silver tailings in a quartz-mill a couple of

weeks, and acquired the last possibilities of culture in that direction.

And I've done "pocket-mining" during three months in the one little patch

of ground in the whole globe where Nature conceals gold in pockets--or

did before we robbed all of those pockets and exhausted, obliterated,

annihilated the most curious freak Nature ever indulged in.  There are

not thirty men left alive who, being told there was a pocket hidden on

the broad slope of a mountain, would know how to go and find it, or have

even the faintest idea of how to set about it; but I am one of the

possible 20 or 30 who possess the secret, and I could go and put my hand

on that hidden treasure with a most deadly precision.



And I've been a prospector, and know pay rock from poor when I find it

--just with a touch of the tongue.  And I've been a silver miner and know

how to dig and shovel and drill and put in a blast.  And so I know the

mines and the miners interiorly as well as Bret Harte knows them

exteriorly.



And I was a newspaper reporter four years in cities, and so saw the

inside of many things; and was reporter in a legislature two sessions

and the same in Congress one session, and thus learned to know personally

three sample bodies of the smallest minds and the selfishest souls and

the cowardliest hearts that God makes.



And I was some years a Mississippi pilot, and familiarly knew all the

different kinds of steam-boatmen--a race apart, and not like other folk.



And I was for some years a traveling "jour" printer, and wandered from

city to city--and so I know that sect familiarly.



And I was a lecturer on the public platform a number of seasons and was a

responder to toasts at all the different kinds of banquets--and so I know

a great many secrets about audiences--secrets not to be got out of books,

but only acquirable by experience.



And I watched over one dear project of mine for years, spent a fortune on

it, and failed to make it go--and the history of that would make a large

book in which a million men would see themselves as in a mirror; and they

would testify and say, Verily, this is not imagination; this fellow has

been there--and after would cast dust upon their heads, cursing and

blaspheming.



And I am a publisher, and did pay to one author's widow (General Grant's)

the largest copyright checks this world has seen--aggregating more than

L80,000 in the first year.



And I have been an author for 20 years and an ass for 55.



Now then; as the most valuable capital or culture or education usable in

the building of novels is personal experience I ought to be well equipped

for that trade.



I surely have the equipment, a wide culture, and all of it real, none of

it artificial, for I don't know anything about books.



                             [No signature.]





     Clemens for several years had been bothered by rheumatism in his

     shoulder.  The return now to the steady use of the pen aggravated

     his trouble, and at times he was nearly disabled.  The phonograph

     for commercial dictation had been tried experimentally, and Mark

     Twain was always ready for any innovation.





                       To W. D. Howells, in Boston:



                                        HARTFORD, Feb.  28, '91.

DEAR HOWELLS,--Won't you drop-in at the Boylston Building (New

England Phonograph Co) and talk into a phonograph in an ordinary

conversation-voice and see if another person (who didn't hear you do it)

can take the words from the thing without difficulty and repeat them to

you.  If the experiment is satisfactory (also make somebody put in a

message which you don't hear, and see if afterward you can get it out

without difficulty) won't you then ask them on what terms they will rent

me a phonograph for 3 months and furnish me cylinders enough to carry

75,000 words.  175 cylinders, ain't it?



I don't want to erase any of them.  My right arm is nearly disabled by

rheumatism, but I am bound to write this book (and sell 100,000 copies of

it--no, I mean a million--next fall) I feel sure I can dictate the book

into a phonograph if I don't have to yell.  I write 2,000 words a day; I

think I can dictate twice as many.



But mind, if this is going to be too much trouble to you--go ahead and do

it, all the same.

                                   Ys ever

                                             MARK.





     Howells, always willing to help, visited the phonograph place, and a

     few days later reported results.  He wrote: "I talked your letter

     into a fonograf in my usual tone at my usual gait of speech.  Then

     the fonograf man talked his answer in at his wonted swing and swell.

     Then we took the cylinder to a type-writer in the next room, and she

     put the hooks into her ears and wrote the whole out.  I send you the

     result.  There is a mistake of one word.  I think that if you have

     the cheek to dictate the story into the fonograf, all the rest is

     perfectly easy.  It wouldn't fatigue me to talk for an hour as I

     did."



     Clemens did not find the phonograph entirely satisfactory, at least

     not for a time, and he appears never to have used it steadily.  His

     early experience with it, however, seems interesting.





                       To W. D. Howells, in Boston:



                                        HARTFORD, Apl. 4, '91.

DEAR HOWELLS,--I'm ashamed.  It happened in this way.  I was proposing to

acknowledge the receipt of the play and the little book per phonograph,

so that you could see that the instrument is good enough for mere

letter-writing; then I meant to add the fact that you can't write

literature with it, because it hasn't any ideas and it hasn't any gift

for elaboration, or smartness of talk, or vigor of action, or felicity of

expression, but is just matter-of-fact, compressive, unornamental, and as

grave and unsmiling as the devil.



I filled four dozen cylinders in two sittings, then found I could have

said about as much with the pen and said it a deal better.  Then I

resigned.



I believe it could teach one to dictate literature to a phonographer--and

some time I will experiment in that line.



The little book is charmingly written, and it interested me.  But it

flies too high for me.  Its concretest things are filmy abstractions to

me, and when I lay my grip on one of them and open my hand, I feel as

embarrassed as I use to feel when I thought I had caught a fly.  I'm

going to try to mail it back to you to-day--I mean I am going to charge

my memory.  Charging my memory is one of my chief industries ....



With our loves and our kindest regards distributed among you according to

the proprieties.

                              Yrs ever

                                        MARK.



P. S.--I'm sending that ancient "Mental Telegraphy" article to Harper's

--with a modest postscript.  Probably read it to you years ago.

                                        S. L. C.





     The "little book" mentioned in this letter was by Swedenborg, an

     author in whom the Boston literary set was always deeply interested.

     "Mental Telegraphy" appeared in Harper's Magazine, and is now

     included in the Uniform Edition of Mark Twain's books.  It was

     written in 1878.



     Joe Goodman had long since returned to California, it being clear

     that nothing could be gained by remaining in Washington.  On receipt

     of the news of the type-setter's collapse he sent a consoling word.

     Perhaps he thought Clemens would rage over the unhappy circumstance,

     and possibly hold him in some measure to blame.  But it was

     generally the smaller annoyances of life that made Mark Twain rage;

     the larger catastrophes were likely to stir only his philosophy.



     The Library of American Literature, mentioned in the following

     letter, was a work in many volumes, edited by Edmund Clarence

     Stedman and Ellen Mackay Hutchinson.





                           To Joe T.  Goodman:



                                                  April [?] 1891.

DEAR JOE, Well, it's all right, anyway.  Diplomacy couldn't have saved

it--diplomacy of mine--at that late day.  I hadn't any diplomacy in

stock, anyway.  In order to meet Jones's requirements I had to surrender

the old contract (a contract which made me boss of the situation and gave

me the whip-hand of Paige) and allow the new one to be drafted and put in

its place.  I was running an immense risk, but it was justified by

Jones's promises--promises made to me not merely once but every time I

tallied with him.  When February arrived, I saw signs which were mighty

plain reading.  Signs which meant that Paige was hoping and praying that

Jones would go back on me--which would leave Paige boss, and me robbed

and out in the cold.  His prayers were answered, and I am out in the

cold.  If I ever get back my nine-twentieths interest, it will be by

law-suit--which will be instituted in the indefinite future, when the

time comes.



I am at work again--on a book.  Not with a great deal of spirit, but with

enough--yes, plenty.  And I am pushing my publishing house.  It has

turned the corner after cleaning $50,000 a year for three consecutive

years, and piling every cent of it into one book--Library of American

Literature--and from next January onward it will resume dividends.  But

I've got to earn $50,000 for it between now and then--which I will do if

I keep my health.  This additional capital is needed for that same book,

because its prosperity is growing so great and exacting.



It is dreadful to think of you in ill health--I can't realize it; you are

always to me the same that you were in those days when matchless health.

and glowing spirits and delight in life were commonplaces with us.  Lord

save us all from old age and broken health and a hope-tree that has lost

the faculty of putting out blossoms.



                    With love to you both from us all.

                                        MARK.





     Mark Twain's residence in Hartford was drawing rapidly to a close.

     Mrs. Clemens was poorly, and his own health was uncertain.  They

     believed that some of the European baths would help them.

     Furthermore, Mark Twain could no longer afford the luxury of his

     Hartford home.  In Europe life could be simpler and vastly cheaper.

     He was offered a thousand dollars apiece for six European letters,

     by the McClure syndicate and W. M. Laffan, of the Sun.  This would

     at least give him a start on the other side.  The family began

     immediately their sad arrangements for departure.





         To Fred J. Hall (manager Chas. L. Webster & Co.), N. Y.:



                                   HARTFORD, Apl. 14, '91.

DEAR MR. HALL,--Privately--keep it to yourself--as you, are already

aware, we are going to Europe in June, for an indefinite stay.  We shall

sell the horses and shut up the house.  We wish to provide a place for

our coachman, who has been with us a 21 years, and is sober, active,

diligent, and unusually bright and capable.  You spoke of hiring a

colored man as engineer and helper in the packing room.  Patrick would

soon learn that trade and be very valuable.  We will cease to need him by

the middle or end of June.  Have you made irrevocable arrangements with

the colored man, or would you prefer to have Patrick, if he thinks he

would like to try?



I have not said anything to him about it yet.



                                   Yours

                                             S. L. C.





     It was to be a complete breaking up of their beautiful

     establishment.  Patrick McAleer, George the butler, and others of

     their household help had been like members of the family.  We may

     guess at the heartbreak of it all, even though the letters remain

     cheerful.



     Howells, strangely enough, seems to have been about the last one to

     be told of their European plans; in fact, he first got wind of it

     from the papers, and wrote for information.  Likely enough Clemens

     had not until then had the courage to confess.





                       To W. D. Howells, in Boston:



                                        HARTFORD, May 20, '91.

DEAR HOWELLS,--For her health's sake Mrs. Clemens must try baths

somewhere, and this it is that has determined us to go to Europe.

The water required seems to be provided at a little obscure and

little-visited nook up in the hills back of the Rhine somewhere and you

get to it by Rhine traffic-boat and country stage-coach.  Come, get "sick

or sorry enough" and join us.  We shall be a little while at that bath,

and the rest of the summer at Annecy (this confidential to you) in Haute

Savoie, 22 miles from Geneva.  Spend the winters in Berlin.  I don't know

how long we shall be in Europe--I have a vote, but I don't cast it.  I'm

going to do whatever the others desire, with leave to change their mind,

without prejudice, whenever they want to.  Travel has no longer, any

charm for me.  I have seen all the foreign countries I want to see except

heaven and hell, and I have only a vague curiosity as concerns one of

those.



I found I couldn't use the play--I had departed too far from its lines

when I came to look at it.  I thought I might get a great deal of

dialogue out of it, but I got only 15 loosely written pages--they saved

me half a days work.  It was the cursing phonograph.  There was abundance

of good dialogue, but it couldn't befitted into the new conditions of the

story.



Oh, look here--I did to-day what I have several times in past years

thought of doing: answered an interviewing proposition from a rich

newspaper with the reminder that they had not stated the terms; that my

time was all occupied with writing, at good pay, and that as talking was

harder work I should not care to venture it unless I knew the pay was

going to be proportionately higher.  I wish I had thought of this the

other day when Charley Stoddard turned a pleasant Englishman loose on me

and I couldn't think of any rational excuse.

                                        Ys Ever

                                                  MARK.





     Clemens had finished his Sellers book and had disposed of the serial

     rights to the McClure syndicate.  The house in Hartford was closed

     early in June, and on the 6th the family, with one maid, Katie

     Leary, sailed on the Gascogne.  Two weeks later they had begun a

     residence abroad which was to last for more than nine years.



     It was not easy to get to work in Europe.  Clemens's arm remained

     lame, and any effort at writing brought suffering.  The Century

     Magazine proposed another set of letters, but by the end of July he

     had barely begun on those promised to McClure and Laffan.  In

     August, however, he was able to send three: one from Aix about the

     baths there, another from Bayreuth concerning the Wagner festival,

     and a third from Marienbad, in Bohemia, where they rested for a

     time.  He decided that he would arrange for no more European letters

     when the six were finished, but would gather material for a book.

     He would take a courier and a kodak and go tramping again in some

     fashion that would be interesting to do and to write.



     The idea finally matured when he reached Switzerland and settled the

     family at the Hotel Beau Rivage, Ouchy, Lausanne, facing Lake Leman.

     He decided to make a floating trip down the Rhone, and he engaged

     Joseph Very, a courier that had served him on a former European

     trip, to accompany him.  The courier went over to Bourget and bought

     for five dollars a flat-bottomed boat and engaged its owner as their

     pilot.  It was the morning of September 20, when they began their

     floating-trip down the beautiful historic river that flows through

     the loveliest and most romantic region of France.  He wrote daily to

     Mrs. Clemens, and his letters tell the story of that drowsy, happy

     experience better than the notes made with a view to publication.

     Clemens had arrived at Lake Bourget on the evening before the

     morning of their start and slept on the Island of Chatillon, in an

     old castle of the same name.  Lake Bourget connects with the Rhone

     by a small canal.





      Letters and Memoranda to Mrs. Clemens, in Ouchy, Switzerland:



                                             Sept. 20, 1891.

                                             Sunday, 11 a.m.

On the lake Bourget--just started.  The castle of Chatillon high overhead

showing above the trees.  It was a wonderfully still place to sleep in.

Beside us there was nobody in it but a woman, a boy and a dog.  A Pope

was born in the room I slept in.  No, he became a Pope later.



The lake is smooth as glass--a brilliant sun is shining.



Our boat is comfortable and shady with its awning.



11.20  We have crossed the lake and are entering the canal.  Shall

presently be in the Rhone.



Noon.  Nearly down to the Rhone.  Passing the village of Chanaz.



3.15 p. m.  Sunday.  We have been in the Rhone 3 hours. It is

unimaginably still and reposeful and cool and soft and breezy.  No rowing

or work of any kind to do--we merely float with the current--we glide

noiseless and swift--as fast as a London cab-horse rips along--8 miles an

hour--the swiftest current I've ever boated in.  We have the entire river

to ourselves--nowhere a boat of any kind.

                         Good bye Sweetheart

                                        S. L. C.





                                        PORT DE GROLEE, Monday, 4.15 p.m.

                                             [Sept. 21, 1891]

Name of the village which we left five minutes ago.



We went ashore at 5 p. m.  yesterday, dear heart, and walked a short mile

to St. Geuix, a big village, and took quarters at the principal inn; had

a good dinner and afterwards along walk out of town on the banks of the

Guiers till 7.30.



Went to bed at 8.30 and continued to make notes and read books and

newspapers till midnight.  Slept until 8, breakfasted in bed, and lay

till noon, because there had been a very heavy rain in the night and the

day was still dark and lowering.  But at noon the sun broke through and

in 15 minutes we were tramping toward the river.  Got afloat at 1 p. m.

but at 2.40 we had to rush suddenly ashore and take refuge in the above

village.  Just as we got ourselves and traps safely housed in the inn,

the rain let go and came down in great style.  We lost an hour and a half

there, but we are off again, now, with bright sunshine.



I wrote you yesterday my darling, and shall expect to write you every

day.



Good-day, and love to all of you.

                                        SAML.





                                        ON THE RHONE BELOW VILLEBOIS,

                                                  Tuesday noon.

Good morning, sweetheart.  Night caught us yesterday where we had to take

quarters in a peasant's house which was occupied by the family and a lot

of cows and calves--also several rabbits.--[His word for fleas.]--The

latter had a ball, and I was the ball-room; but they were very friendly

and didn't bite.



The peasants were mighty kind and hearty, and flew around and did their

best to make us comfortable.  This morning I breakfasted on the shore in

the open air with two sociable dogs and a cat.  Clean cloth, napkin and

table furniture, white sugar, a vast hunk of excellent butter, good

bread, first class coffee with pure milk, fried fish just caught.

Wonderful that so much cleanliness should come out of such a phenomenally

dirty house.



An hour ago we saw the Falls of the Rhone, a prodigiously rough and

dangerous looking place; shipped a little water but came to no harm.

It was one of the most beautiful pieces of piloting and boat-management

I ever saw.  Our admiral knew his business.



We have had to run ashore for shelter every time it has rained

heretofore, but Joseph has been putting in his odd time making a

water-proof sun-bonnet for the boat, and now we sail along dry although

we had many heavy showers this morning.



With a word of love to you all and particularly you,

                                                       SAML.





                                             ON THE RHONE, BELOW VIENNA.

I salute you, my darling.  Your telegram reached me in Lyons last night

and was very pleasant news indeed.



I was up and shaved before 8 this morning, but we got delayed and didn't

sail from Lyons till 10.30--an hour and a half lost.  And we've lost

another hour--two of them, I guess--since, by an error.  We came in sight

of Vienne at 2 o'clock, several miles ahead, on a hill, and I proposed to

walk down there and let the boat go ahead of us.  So Joseph and I got out

and struck through a willow swamp along a dim path, and by and by came

out on the steep bank of a slough or inlet or something, and we followed

that bank forever and ever trying to get around the head of that slough.

Finally I noticed a twig standing up in the water, and by George it had a

distinct and even vigorous quiver to it!  I don't know when I have felt

so much like a donkey.  On an island!  I wanted to drown somebody, but I

hadn't anybody I could spare.  However, after another long tramp we found

a lonely native, and he had a scow and soon we were on the mainland--yes,

and a blamed sight further from Vienne than we were when we started.



Notes--I make millions of them; and so I get no time to write to you.  If

you've got a pad there, please send it poste-restante to Avignon.  I may

not need it but I fear I shall.



I'm straining to reach St. Pierre de Boef, but it's going to be a close

fit, I reckon.





                                   AFLOAT, Friday, 3 p.m., '91.

Livy darling, we sailed from St. Pierre de Boef six hours ago, and are

now approaching Tournon, where we shall not stop, but go on and make

Valence, a City Of 25,000 people.  It's too delicious, floating with the

swift current under the awning these superb sunshiny days in deep peace

and quietness.  Some of these curious old historical towns strangely

persuade me, but it is so lovely afloat that I don't stop, but view them

from the outside and sail on.  We get abundance of grapes and peaches for

next to nothing.



Joseph is perfect.  He is at his very best--and never was better in his

life.  I guess he gets discouraged and feels disliked and in the way when

he is lying around--but here he is perfection, and brim full of useful

alacrities and helps and ingenuities.



When I woke up an hour ago and heard the clock strike 4, I said "I seem

to have been asleep an immensely long time; I must have gone to bed

mighty early; I wonder what time I did go to bed."  And I got up and lit

a candle and looked at my watch to see.





                                                       AFLOAT

                                        2 HOURS BELOW BOURG ST. ANDEOL.

                                        Monday, 11 a.m., Sept. 28.

Livy darling, I didn't write yesterday.  We left La Voulte in a driving

storm of cold rain--couldn't write in it--and at 1 p. m.  when we were

not thinking of stopping, we saw a picturesque and mighty ruin on a high

hill back of a village, and I was seized with a desire to explore it; so

we landed at once and set out with rubbers and umbrella, sending the boat

ahead to St. Andeol, and we spent 3 hours clambering about those cloudy

heights among those worn and vast and idiotic ruins of a castle built by

two crusaders 650 years ago.  The work of these asses was full of

interest, and we had a good time inspecting, examining and scrutinizing

it.  All the hills on both sides of the Rhone have peaks and precipices,

and each has its gray and wasted pile of mouldy walls and broken towers.

The Romans displaced the Gauls, the Visigoths displaced the Romans, the

Saracens displaced the Visigoths, the Christians displaced the Saracens,

and it was these pious animals who built these strange lairs and cut each

other's throats in the name and for the glory of God, and robbed and

burned and slew in peace and war; and the pauper and the slave built

churches, and the credit of it went to the Bishop who racked the money

out of them.  These are pathetic shores, and they make one despise the

human race.



We came down in an hour by rail, but I couldn't get your telegram till

this morning, for it was Sunday and they had shut up the post office to

go to the circus.  I went, too.  It was all one family--parents and 5

children--performing in the open air to 200 of these enchanted villagers,

who contributed coppers when called on.  It was a most gay and strange

and pathetic show.  I got up at 7 this morning to see the poor devils

cook their poor breakfast and pack up their sordid fineries.



This is a 9 k-m. current and the wind is with us; we shall make Avignon

before 4 o'clock.  I saw watermelons and pomegranates for sale at St.

Andeol.



               With a power of love, Sweetheart,

                                                  SAML.





                                             HOTEL D'EUROPE, AVIGNON,

                                             Monday, 6 p.m., Sept. 28.

Well, Livy darling, I have been having a perfect feast of letters for an

hour, and I thank you and dear Clam with all my heart.  It's like hearing

from home after a long absence.



It is early to be in bed, but I'm always abed before 9, on this voyage;

and up at 7 or a trifle later, every morning.  If I ever take such a trip

again, I will have myself called at the first tinge of dawn and get to

sea as soon after as possible.  The early dawn on the water-nothing can

be finer, as I know by old Mississippi experience.  I did so long for you

and Sue yesterday morning--the most superb sunrise!--the most marvelous

sunrise! and I saw it all from the very faintest suspicion of the coming

dawn all the way through to the final explosion of glory.  But it had

interest private to itself and not to be found elsewhere in the world;

for between me and it, in the far distant-eastward, was a silhouette

mountain-range in which I had discovered, the previous afternoon, a most

noble face upturned to the sky, and mighty form out stretched, which I

had named Napoleon Dreaming of Universal Empire--and now, this prodigious

face, soft, rich, blue, spirituelle, asleep, tranquil, reposeful, lay

against that giant conflagration of ruddy and golden splendors all rayed

like a wheel with the upstreaming and far-reaching lances of the sun.  It

made one want to cry for delight, it was so supreme in its unimaginable

majesty and beauty.



We had a curious experience today.  A little after I had sealed and

directed my letter to you, in which I said we should make Avignon before

4, we got lost.  We ceased to encounter any village or ruin mentioned in

our "particularizes" and detailed Guide of the Rhone--went drifting along

by the hour in a wholly unknown land and on an uncharted river!  Confound

it, we stopped talking and did nothing but stand up in the boat and

search the horizons with the glass and wonder what in the devil had

happened.  And at last, away yonder at 5 o'clock when some east towers

and fortresses hove in sight we couldn't recognize them for Avignon--yet

we knew by the broken bridge that it was Avignon.



Then we saw what the trouble was--at some time or other we had drifted

down the wrong side of an island and followed a sluggish branch of the

Rhone not frequented in modern times.  We lost an hour and a half by it

and missed one of the most picturesque and gigantic and history-sodden

masses of castellated medieval ruin that Europe can show.



It was dark by the time we had wandered through the town and got the

letters and found the hotel--so I went to bed.



We shall leave here at noon tomorrow and float down to Arles, arriving

about dark, and there bid good bye to the boat, the river-trip finished.

Between Arles and Nimes (and Avignon again,) we shall be till Saturday

morning--then rail it through on that day to Ouchy, reaching the hotel at

11 at night if the train isn't late.



Next day (Sunday) if you like, go to Basel, and Monday to Berlin.  But I

shall be at your disposal, to do exactly as you desire and prefer.



          With no end of love to all of you and twice as much to you,

               sweetheart,

                         SAML.



I believe my arm is a trifle better than it was when I started.





     The mention in the foregoing letter of the Napoleon effigy is the

     beginning of what proved to be a rather interesting episode.  Mark

     Twain thought a great deal of his discovery, as he called it--the

     giant figure of Napoleon outlined by the distant mountain range.

     In his note-book he entered memoranda telling just where it was to

     be seen, and added a pencil sketch of the huge profile.  But then he

     characteristically forgot all about it, and when he recalled the

     incident ten years later, he could not remember the name of the

     village, Beauchastel, from which the great figure could be seen;

     also, that he had made a record of the place.



     But he was by this time more certain than ever that his discovery

     was a remarkable one, which, if known, would become one of the great

     natural wonders, such as Niagara Falls.  Theodore Stanton was

     visiting him at the time, and Clemens urged him, on his return to

     France, to make an excursion to the Rhone and locate the Lost

     Napoleon, as he now called it.  But Clemens remembered the wonder as

     being somewhere between Arles and Avignon, instead of about a

     hundred miles above the last-named town.  Stanton naturally failed

     to find it, and it remained for the writer of these notes, motoring

     up the Rhone one September day, exactly twenty-two years after the

     first discovery, to re-locate the vast reclining figure of the first

     consul of France, "dreaming of Universal Empire."  The re-discovery

     was not difficult--with Mark Twain's memoranda as a guide--and it

     was worth while.  Perhaps the Lost Napoleon is not so important a

     natural wonder as Mark Twain believed, but it is a striking picture,

     and on a clear day the calm blue face outlined against the sky will

     long hold the traveler's attention.



                 To Clara Clemens, in Ouchy, Switzerland:



                              AFLOAT, 11.20 a.m., Sept. 29, Tuesday.

DEAR OLD BEN,--The vast stone masses and huge towers of the ancient papal

palace of Avignon are projected above an intervening wooded island a mile

up the river behind me--for we are already on our way to Arles.  It is a

perfectly still morning, with a brilliant sun, and very hot--outside; but

I am under cover of the linen hood, and it is cool and shady in here.



Please tell mamma I got her very last letter this morning, and I perceive

by it that I do not need to arrive at Ouchy before Saturday midnight.

I am glad, because I couldn't do the railroading I am proposing to do

during the next two or three days and get there earlier.  I could put in

the time till Sunday midnight, but shall not venture it without

telegraphic instructions from her to Nimes day after tomorrow, Oct. 1,

care Hotel Manivet.



The only adventures we have is in drifting into rough seas now and then.

They are not dangerous, but they go thro' all the motions of it.

Yesterday when we shot the Bridge of the Holy Spirit it was probably in

charge of some inexperienced deputy spirit for the day, for we were

allowed to go through the wrong arch, which brought us into a tourbillon

below which tried to make this old scow stand on its head.  Of course I

lost my temper and blew it off in a way to be heard above the roar of the

tossing waters.  I lost it because the admiral had taken that arch in

deference to my opinion that it was the best one, while his own judgment

told him to take the one nearest the other side of the river.  I could

have poisoned him I was so mad to think I had hired such a turnip.

A boatman in command should obey nobody's orders but his own, and yield

to nobody's suggestions.



It was very sweet of you to write me, dear, and I thank you ever so much.

With greatest love and kisses,

                                   PAPA.





                 To Mrs. Clemens, in Ouchy, Switzerland:



                                             ARLES, Sept. 30, noon.

Livy darling, I hain't got no time to write today, because I am sight

seeing industriously and imagining my chapter.



Bade good-bye to the river trip and gave away the boat yesterday evening.

We had ten great days in her.



We reached here after dark.  We were due about 4.30, counting by

distance, but we couldn't calculate on such a lifeless current as we

found.

               I love you, sweetheart.

                                        SAML.





     It had been a long time since Clemens had written to his old friend

     Twichell, but the Rhone trip must have reminded him of those days

     thirteen years earlier, when, comparatively young men, he and

     Twichell were tramping through the Black Forest and scaling Gemmi

     Pass.  He sent Twichell a reminder of that happy time.





              To Rev. Joseph H. Twichell, in Hartford, Conn:



                                                  NIMES, Oct. 1, '91.

DEAR JOE,--I have been ten days floating down the Rhone on a raft, from

Lake Bourget, and a most curious and darling kind of a trip it has been.

You ought to have been along--I could have made room for you easily--and

you would have found that a pedestrian tour in Europe doesn't begin with

a raft-voyage for hilarity and mild adventure, and intimate contact with

the unvisited native of the back settlements, and extinction from the

world and newspapers, and a conscience in a state of coma, and lazy

comfort, and solid happiness.  In fact there's nothing that's so lovely.



But it's all over.  I gave the raft away yesterday at Arles, and am

loafing along back by short stages on the rail to Ouchy-Lausanne where

the tribe are staying.

                         Love to you all

                                        MARK.





     The Clemenses settled in Berlin for the winter, at 7 Kornerstrasse,

     and later at the Hotel Royal.  There had been no permanent

     improvement in Mark Twain's arm and he found writing difficult.

     Some of the letters promised to Laffan and McClure were still

     unfinished.



     Young Hall, his publishing manager in America, was working hard to

     keep the business afloat, and being full of the optimism of his

     years did not fail to make as good a showing as he could.  We may

     believe his letters were very welcome to Clemens and his wife, who

     found little enough in the general prospect to comfort them.





                        To Mr. Hall, in New York:



                                                  BERLIN, Nov. 27, '91.

DEAR MR. HALL,--That kind of a statement is valuable.  It came this

morning.  This is the first time since the business began that I have had

a report that furnished the kind of information I wanted, and was really

enlightening and satisfactory.  Keep it up.  Don't let it fall into

desuetude.



Everything looks so fine and handsome with the business, now, that I feel

a great let-up from depression.  The rewards of your long and patient

industry are on their way, and their arrival safe in port, presently,

seems assured.



By George, I shall be glad when the ship comes in!



My arm is so much better that I was able to make a speech last night to

250 Americans.  But when they threw my portrait on the screen it was a

sorrowful reminder, for it was from a negative of 15 years ago, and

hadn't a gray hair in it.  And now that my arm is better, I have stolen a

couple of days and finished up a couple of McClure letters that have been

lying a long time.



I shall mail one of them to you next Tuesday--registered.  Lookout for

it.



I shall register and mail the other one (concerning the "Jungfrau") next

Friday look out for it also, and drop me a line to let me know they have

arrived.



I shall write the 6th and last letter by and by when I have studied

Berlin sufficiently.



Yours in a most cheerful frame of mind, and with my and all the family's

Thanksgiving greetings and best wishes,

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.





       Postscript by Mrs. Clemens written on Mr. Clemens's letter:



DEAR MR. HALL,--This is my birthday and your letter this morning was a

happy addition to the little gifts on the breakfast table.  I thought of

going out and spending money for something unnecessary after it came, but

concluded perhaps I better wait a little longer.

                                   Sincerely yours

                                             O. L. CLEMENS.





     "The German Chicago" was the last of the six McClure letters and was

     finished that winter in Berlin.  It is now included in the Uniform

     Edition of Mark Twain's works, and is one of the best descriptive

     articles of the German capital ever written.  He made no use of the

     Rhone notes further than to put them together in literary form.

     They did not seem to him to contain enough substance to warrant

     publication.  A letter to Hall, written toward the end of December,

     we find rather gloomy in tone, though he is still able to extract

     comfort and even cheerfulness from one of Mr. Hall's reports.





                 Memorandum to Fred J. Hall, in New York:



Among the MSS I left with you are a few that have a recent look and are

written on rather stiff pale green paper.  If you will have those

type-writered and keep the originals and send me the copies (one per

mail, not two.) I'll see if I can use them.



But tell Howells and other inquirers that my hopes of writing anything

are very slender--I seem to be disabled for life.



Drop McClure a line and tell him the same.  I can't dare to make an

engagement now for even a single letter.



I am glad Howells is on a magazine, but sorry he gave up the Study.

I shall have to go on a magazine myself if this L. A. L. continues to

hold my nose down to the grind-stone much longer.



I'm going to hold my breath, now, for 30 days--then the annual statement

will arrive and I shall know how we feel!  Merry Xmas to you from us all.



                         Sincerely,

                                   S. L. C.



P. S.  Just finished the above and finished raging at the eternal German

tax-gatherer, and so all the jubilant things which I was going to say

about the past year's business got knocked out of me.  After writing this

present letter I was feeling blue about Huck Finn, but I sat down and

overhauled your reports from now back to last April and compared them

with the splendid Oct.-Nov.  business, and went to bed feeling refreshed

and fine, for certainly it has been a handsome year.  Now rush me along

the Annual Report and let's see how we feel!

                                                  S. L. C.









XXXII



LETTERS, 1892, CHIEFLY TO MR. HALL AND MRS. CRANE.  IN BERLIN, MENTONE,

BAD-NAUHEIM, FLORENCE



Mark Twain was the notable literary figure in Berlin that winter, the

center of every great gathering.  He was entertained by the Kaiser, and

shown many special attentions by Germans of every rank.  His books were

as well known in Berlin as in New York, and at court assemblies and

embassies he was always a chief center of interest.



He was too popular for his own good; the gaiety of the capital told on

him.  Finally, one night, after delivering a lecture in a hot room, he

contracted a severe cold, driving to a ball at General von Versen's, and

a few days later was confined to his bed with pneumonia.  It was not a

severe attack, but it was long continued.  He could write some letters

and even work a little, but he was not allowed to leave his bed for many

weeks, a condition which he did not find a hardship, for no man ever

enjoyed the loose luxury of undress and the comfort of pillows more than

Mark Twain.  In a memorandum of that time he wrote: "I am having a

booming time all to myself."



Meantime, Hall, in America, was sending favorable reports of the

publishing business, and this naturally helped to keep up his spirits.

He wrote frequently to Hall, of course, but the letters for the most part

are purely of a business nature and of little interest to the general

reader.





                      To Fred J.  Hall, in New York:



                                        HOTEL ROYAL, BERLIN, Feb. 12.

DEAR MR. HALL,--Daly wants to get the stage rights of the "American

Claimant."  The foundation from which I wrote the story is a play of the

same name which has been in A. P. Burbank's hands 5 or 6 years.  That

play cost me some money (helping Burbank stage it) but has never brought

me any.  I have written Burbank (Lotos Club) and asked him to give me

back his rights in the old play so that I can treat with Daly and utilize

this chance to even myself up.  Burbank is a lovely fellow, and if he

objects I can't urge him.  But you run in at the Lotos and see him; and

if he relinquishes his claim, then I would like you to conduct the

business with Daly; or have Whitford or some other lawyer do it under

your supervision if you prefer.



This morning I seem to have rheumatism in my right foot.



I am ordered south by the doctor and shall expect to be well enough to

start by the end of this month.



                             [No signature.]







     It is curious, after Clemens and Howells had tried so hard and so

     long to place their "Sellers" Play, that now, when the story

     appeared in book form, Augustin Daly should have thought it worth

     dramatizing.  Daly and Clemens were old friends, and it would seem

     that Daly could hardly have escaped seeing the play when it was

     going the rounds.  But perhaps there is nothing more mysterious in

     the world than the ways and wants of theatrical managers.  The

     matter came to nothing, of course, but the fact that Daly should

     have thought a story built from an old discarded play had a play in

     it seems interesting.



     Clemens and his wife were advised to leave the cold of Berlin as

     soon as he was able to travel.  This was not until the first of

     March, when, taking their old courier, Joseph Very, they left the

     children in good hands and journeyed to the south of France.





                       To Susy Clemens, in Berlin:



                                             MENTONE, Mch 22, '92.

SUSY DEAR,--I have been delighted to note your easy facility with your

pen and proud to note also your literary superiorities of one kind and

another--clearness of statement, directness, felicity of expression,

photographic ability in setting forth an incident--style--good style--no

barnacles on it in the way of unnecessary, retarding words (the Shipman

scrapes off the barnacles when he wants his racer to go her best gait and

straight to the buoy.) You should write a letter every day, long or short

--and so ought I, but I don't.



Mamma says, tell Clara yes, she will have to write a note if the fan

comes back mended.



We couldn't go to Nice to-day--had to give it up, on various accounts

--and this was the last chance.  I am sorry for Mamma--I wish she could

have gone.  She got a heavy fall yesterday evening and was pretty stiff

and lame this morning, but is working it off trunk packing.



Joseph is gone to Nice to educate himself in Kodaking--and to get the

pictures mounted which Mamma thinks she took here; but I noticed she

didn't take the plug out, as a rule.  When she did, she took nine

pictures on top of each other--composites.

                              With lots of love.

                                                  PAPA.





     In the course of their Italian wanderings they reached Florence,

     where they were so comfortable and well that they decided to engage

     a villa for the next winter.  Through Prof. Willard Fiske, they

     discovered the Villa Viviani, near Settignano, an old palace

     beautifully located on the hilltops east of Florence, commanding a

     wonderful view of the ancient city.  Clemens felt that he could work

     there, and time proved that he was right.



     For the summer, however, they returned to Germany, and located at

     Bad-Nauheim.  Clemens presently decided to make a trip to America to

     give some personal attention to business matters.  For one thing,

     his publishing-house, in spite of prosperity, seemed constantly to

     be requiring more capital, and then a Chicago company had been

     persuaded by Paige to undertake the manufacture of the type-setter.

     It was the beginning of a series of feverish trips which he would

     make back and forth across the ocean during the next two years.





                      To Fred J.  Hall, in New York:



                                        BAD-NAUHEIM, June 11, '92.

                                                       Saturday.

DEAR MR. HALL,--If this arrives before I do, let it inform you that I am

leaving Bremen for New York next Tuesday in the "Havel."



If you can meet me when the ship arrives, you can help me to get away

from the reporters; and maybe you can take me to your own or some other

lodgings where they can't find me.



But if the hour is too early or too late for you, I shall obscure myself

somewhere till I can come to the office.



Yours sincerely

                         S. L. C.





     Nothing of importance happened in America.  The new Paige company

     had a factory started in Chicago and expected to manufacture fifty

     machines as a beginning.  They claimed to have capital, or to be

     able to command it, and as the main control had passed from

     Clemens's hands, he could do no more than look over the ground and

     hope for the best.  As for the business, about all that he could do

     was to sign certain notes necessary to provide such additional

     capital as was needed, and agree with Hall that hereafter they would

     concentrate their efforts and resist further temptation in the way

     of new enterprise.  Then he returned to Bad-Nauheim and settled down

     to literature.  This was the middle of July, and he must have worked

     pretty steadily, for he presently had a variety of MSS. ready to

     offer.





                      To Fred J.  Hall, in New York:



                                                       Aug. 10, '92.

DEAR MR. HALT,--I have dropped that novel I wrote you about, because I

saw a more effective way of using the main episode--to wit: by telling it

through the lips of Huck Finn.  So I have started Huck Finn and Tom

Sawyer (still 15 years old) and their friend the freed slave Jim around

the world in a stray balloon, with Huck as narrator, and somewhere after

the end of that great voyage he will work in the said episode and then

nobody will suspect that a whole book has been written and the globe

circumnavigated merely to get that episode in an effective (and at the

same time apparently unintentional) way.  I have written 12,000 words of

this narrative, and find that the humor flows as easily as the adventures

and surprises--so I shall go along and make a book of from 50,000 to

100,000 words.



It is a story for boys, of course, and I think will interest any boy

between 8 years and 80.



When I was in New York the other day Mrs. Dodge, editor of St. Nicholas,

wrote and, offered me $5,000 for (serial right) a story for boys 50,000

words long.  I wrote back and declined, for I had other matter in my

mind, then.



I conceive that the right way to write a story for boys is to write so

that it will not only interest boys but will also strongly interest any

man who has ever been a boy.  That immensely enlarges the audience.



Now this story doesn't need to be restricted to a Childs magazine--it is

proper enough for any magazine, I should think, or for a syndicate.  I

don't swear it, but I think so.



Proposed title of the story, "New Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."



                             [No signature.]





     The "novel" mentioned in the foregoing was The Extraordinary Twins,

     a story from which Pudd'nhead Wilson would be evolved later.  It was

     a wildly extravagant farce--just the sort of thing that now and then

     Mark Twain plunged into with an enthusiasm that had to work itself

     out and die a natural death, or mellow into something worth while.

     Tom Sawyer Abroad, as the new Huck story was finally called, was

     completed and disposed of to St. Nicholas for serial publication.



     The Twichells were in Europe that summer, and came to Bad-Nauheim.

     The next letter records a pleasant incident.  The Prince of Wales of

     that day later became King Edward VII.





             To Mr. and Mrs. Orion Clemens, in Keokuk, Iowa.:



                                   Private.  BAD-NAUHEIM, Aug. 23, '92.

DEAR ORION AND MOLLIE,--("Private" because no newspaper-man or other

gossip must get hold of it)



Livy is getting along pretty well, and the doctor thinks another summer

here will cure her.



The Twichell's have been here four days and we have had good times with

them.  Joe and I ran over to Homburg, the great pleasure resort,

Saturday, to dine with some friends, and in the morning I went walking in

the promenade and met the British Ambassador to the Court of Berlin, and

he introduced me to the Prince of Wales, and I found him a most unusually

comfortable and unembarrassing Englishman to talk with--quick to see the

obscurest point, and equipped with a laugh which is spontaneous and

catching.  Am invited by a near friend of his to meet him at dinner day

after tomorrow, and there could be a good time, but the brass band will

smash the talk and spoil everything.



We are expecting to move to Florence ten or twelve days hence, but if

this hot weather continues we shall wait for cooler.  I take Clara to

Berlin for the winter-music, mainly, with German and French added.  Thus

far, Jean is our only glib French scholar.



We all send love to you all and to Pamela and Sam's family, and Annie.



                                   SAM





     Clemens and family left Bad-Nauheim for Italy by way of Switzerland.

     In September Mrs. Clemens's sister, Mrs. Crane, who had been with

     them in Europe during the first year, had now returned to America.

     Mrs. Clemens had improved at the baths, though she had by no means

     recovered her health.  We get a general report of conditions from

     the letter which Clemens wrote Mrs. Crane from Lucerne, Switzerland,

     where the party rested for several days.  The "Phelps" mentioned in

     this letter was William Walter Phelps, United States Minister to

     Germany.  The Phelps and Clemens families had been much associated

     in Berlin.  "Mason" was Frank Mason, Consul General at Frankfort,

     and in later years at Paris.  "Charlie and Ida" were Charles and

     Mrs. Langdon, of Elmira.





                    To Mrs. Crane, in Elmira, N. Y.:



                                             LUCERNE, Sept. 18, '92.

DEAR AUNT SUE,--Imagine how I felt to find that you had actually gone off

without filling my traveling ink stand which you gave me!  I found it out

yesterday.  Livy advised me to write you about it.



I have been driving this pen hard.  I wrote 280 pages on a yarn called

"Tom Sawyer Abroad," then took up the "Twins" again, destroyed the last

half of the manuscript and re-wrote it in another form, and am going to

continue it and finish it in Florence.  "Tom Sawyer" seems rather pale to

the family after the extravagances of the Twins, but they came to like it

after they got used to it.



We remained in Nauheim a little too long.  If we had left there four or

five days earlier we should have made Florence in 3 days; but by the time

we got started Livy had got smitten with what we feared might be

erysipelas--greatly swollen neck and face, and unceasing headaches.  We

lay idle in Frankfort 4 days, doctoring.  We started Thursday and made

Bale.  Hard trip, because it was one of those trains that gets tired

every seven minutes and stops to rest three quarters of an hour.  It took

us 3 1/2 hours to get here, instead of the regulation 2.20.  We reached

here Friday evening and will leave tomorrow (Tuesday) morning.  The rest

has made the headaches better.  We shall pull through to Milan tomorrow

if possible.  Next day we shall start at 10 a. m., and try to make

Bologna, 5 hours.  Next day (Thursday) Florence, D. V.  Next year we will

walk, for these excursions have got to be made over again.  I've got

seven trunks, and I undertook to be courier because I meant to express

them to Florence direct, but we were a couple of days too late.  All

continental roads had issued a peremptory order that no baggage should

travel a mile except in the company of the owner.  (All over Europe

people are howling; they are separated from their baggage and can't get

it forwarded to them) I have to re-ship my trunks every day.  It is very

amusing--uncommonly so.  There seemed grave doubts about our being able

to get these trunks over the Italian frontier, but I've got a very

handsome note from the Frankfort Italian Consul General addressed to all

Italian Customs Officers, and we shall get through if anybody does.



The Phelpses came to Frankfort and we had some great times--dinner at his

hotel, the Masons, supper at our inn--Livy not in it.  She was merely

allowed a glimpse, no more.  Of course, Phelps said she was merely

pretending to be ill; was never looking so well and fine.



The children are all right.  They paddle around a little, and drive-so do

we all.  Lucerne seems to be pretty full of tourists.  The Fleulen boat

went out crowded yesterday morning.



The Paris Herald has created a public interest by inoculating one of its

correspondents with cholera.  A man said yesterday he wished to God they

would inoculate all of them.  Yes, the interest is quite general and

strong, and much hope is felt.



Livy says, I have said enough bad things, and better send all our loves

to you and Charley and Ida and all the children and shut up.  Which I do

--and shut up.

                              S. L. C.





     They reached Florence on the 26th, and four days later we find

     Clemens writing again to Mrs. Crane, detailing everything at length.

     Little comment on this letter is required; it fully explains itself.

     Perhaps a word of description from one of his memoranda will not be

     out of place.  Of the villa he wrote: "It is a plain, square

     building, like a box, and is painted light green and has green

     window-shutters.  It stands in a commanding position on the

     artificial terrace of liberal dimensions, which is walled around

     with masonry.  From the walls the vineyards and olive groves of the

     estate slant away toward the valley....  Roses overflow the

     retaining walls and the battered and mossy stone urn on the

     gate-post, in pink and yellow cataracts, exactly as they do on the

     drop-curtains in the theaters.  The house is a very fortress for

     strength."



     The Mrs. Ross in this letter was Janet Ross, daughter of Lady Duff

     Gordon, remembered to-day for her Egyptian letters.  The Ross castle

     was but a little distance away.





                        To Mrs. Crane, in Elmira:



                                   VILLA VIVIANI, SETTIGNANO, FLORENCE.

                                                  Sept.  30, 1892

DEAR SUE,--We have been in the house several days, and certainly it is a

beautiful place,--particularly at this moment, when the skies are a deep

leaden color, the domes of Florence dim in the drizzling rain, and

occasional perpendicular coils of lightning quivering intensely in the

black sky about Galileo's Tower.  It is a charming panorama, and the most

conspicuous towers and domes down in the city look to-day just as they

looked when Boccaccio and Dante used to contemplate them from this

hillock five and six hundred years ago.



The Mademoiselle is a great help to Livy in the housekeeping, and is a

cheery and cheerful presence in the house.  The butler is equipped with a

little French, and it is this fact that enables the house to go--but it

won't go well until the family get some sort of facility with the Italian

tongue, for the cook, the woman-of-all-work and the coachman understand

only that.  It is a stubborn and devilish language to learn, but Jean and

the others will master it.  Livy's German Nauheim girl is the worst off

of anybody, as there is no market for her tongue at all among the help.



With the furniture in and the curtains up the house is very pretty, and

not unhomelike.  At mid-night last night we heard screams up stairs--Susy

had set the lofty window curtains afire with a candle.  This sounds kind

of frightful, whereas when you come to think of it, a burning curtain or

pile of furniture hasn't any element of danger about it in this fortress.

There isn't any conceivable way to burn this house down, or enable a

conflagration on one floor to climb to the next.



Mrs. Ross laid in our wood, wine and servants for us, and they are

excellent.  She had the house scoured from Cellar to rook the curtains

washed and put up, all beds pulled to pieces, beaten, washed and put

together again, and beguiled the Marchese into putting a big porcelain

stove in the vast central hall.  She is a wonderful woman, and we don't

quite see how or when we should have gotten under way without her.



Observe our address above--the post delivers letters daily at the house.



Even with the work and fuss of settling the house Livy has improved--and

the best is yet to come.  There is going to be absolute seclusion here

--a hermit life, in fact.  We (the rest of us) shall run over to the

Ross's frequently, and they will come here now and then and see Livy

--that is all.  Mr. Fiske is away--nobody knows where--and the work on

his house has been stopped and his servants discharged.  Therefore we

shall merely go Rossing--as far as society is concerned--shan't circulate

in Florence until Livy shall be well enough to take a share in it.



This present house is modern.  It is not much more than two centuries

old; but parts of it, and also its foundations are of high antiquity.

The fine beautiful family portraits--the great carved ones in the large

ovals over the doors of the big hall--carry one well back into the past.

One of them is dated 1305--he could have known Dante, you see.  Another

is dated 1343--he could have known Boccaccio and spent his afternoons in

Fiesole listening to the Decameron tales.  Another is dated 1463

--he could have met Columbus.....



Evening.  The storm thundered away until night, and the rain came down in

floods.  For awhile there was a partial break, which furnished about such

a sunset as will be exhibited when the Last Day comes and the universe

tumbles together in wreck and ruin.  I have never seen anything more

spectacular and impressive.



One person is satisfied with the villa, anyway.  Jean prefers it to all

Europe, save Venice.  Jean is eager to get at the Italian tongue again,

now, and I see that she has forgotten little or nothing of what she

learned of it in Rome and Venice last spring.



I am the head French duffer of the family.  Most of the talk goes over my

head at the table.  I catch only words, not phrases.  When Italian comes

to be substituted I shall be even worse off than I am now, I suppose.



This reminds me that this evening the German girl said to Livy, "Man hat

mir gesagt loss Sie una candella verlaught habe"--unconsciously dropping

in a couple of Italian words, you see.  So she is going to join the

polyglots, too, it appears.  They say it is good entertainment to hear

her and the butler talk together in their respective tongues, piecing out

and patching up with the universal sign-language as they go along.  Five

languages in use in the house (including the sign-language-hardest-worked

of them all) and yet with all this opulence of resource we do seem to

have an uncommonly tough time making ourselves understood.



What we lack is a cat.  If we only had Germania!  That was the most

satisfactory all-round cat I have seen yet.  Totally ungermanic in the

raciness of his character and in the sparkle of his mind and the

spontaneity of his movements.  We shall not look upon his like again....



                                        S. L. C.





     Clemens got well settled down to work presently.  He found the

     situation, the climate, the background, entirely suited to literary

     production, and in a little while he had accomplished more than at

     any other time since his arrival in Europe.  From letters to Mrs.

     Crane and to Mr. Hall we learn something of his employments and his

     satisfaction.





                        To Mrs. Crane, in Elmira:



                                                  VILLA VIVIANI

                              SETTIGNANO, FLORENCE.  Oct. 22, '92.

DEAR SUE,--We are getting wonted.  The open fires have driven away the

cold and the doubt, and now a cheery spirit pervades the place.  Livy and

the Kings and Mademoiselle having been taking their tea a number of

times, lately, on the open terrace with the city and the hills and the

sunset for company.  I stop work, a few minutes, as a rule, when the sun

gets down to the hilltops west of Florence, and join the tea-group to

wonder and exclaim.  There is always some new miracle in the view, a new

and exquisite variation in the show, a variation which occurs every 15

minutes between dawn and night.  Once early in the morning, a multitude

of white villas not before perceived, revealed themselves on the far

hills; then we recognized that all those great hills are snowed thick

with them, clear to the summit.



The variety of lovely effects, the infinitude of change, is something not

to be believed by any who has not seen it.  No view that I am acquainted

with in the world is at all comparable to this for delicacy, charm,

exquisiteness, dainty coloring, and bewildering rapidity of change.  It

keeps a person drunk with pleasure all the time.  Sometimes Florence

ceases to be substantial, and becomes just a faint soft dream, with domes

and towers of air, and one is persuaded that he might blow it away with a

puff of his breath.



Livy is progressing admirably.  This is just the place for her.



                           [Remainder missing.]





                      To Fred J.  Hall, in New York:



                                                  Dec.  12, '92.

DEAR MR. HALL,--November check received.



I have lent the Californian's Story to Arthur Stedman for his Author Club

Book, so your suggestion that my new spring-book bear that name arrives

too late, as he probably would not want us to use that story in a book of

ours until the Author book had had its run.  That is for him to decide

--and I don't want him hampered at all in his decision.  I, for my part,

prefer the "$1,000,000 Banknote and Other Stories" by Mark Twain as a

title, but above my judgment I prefer yours.  I mean this--it is not

taffy.



I told Arthur to leave out the former squib or paragraph and use only the

Californian's Story.  Tell him this is because I am going to use that in

the book I am now writing.



I finished "Those Extraordinary Twins" night before last makes 60 or

80,000 words--haven't counted.



The last third of it suits me to a dot.  I begin, to-day, to entirely

recast and re-write the first two-thirds--new plan, with two minor

characters, made very prominent, one major character cropped out, and the

Twins subordinated to a minor but not insignificant place.



The minor character will now become the chiefest, and I will name the

story after him--"Puddn'head Wilson."



Merry Xmas to you, and great prosperity and felicity!



                                                  S. L. CLEMENS.









XXXIII



LETTERS, 1893, TO MR. HALL, MRS.  CLEMENS, AND OTHERS. FLORENCE.

BUSINESS TROUBLES.  "PUDD'NHEAD WILSON."  "JOAN OF ARC."

AT THE PLAYERS, NEW YORK



The reader may have suspected that young Mr. Hall in New York was having

his troubles.  He was by this time one-third owner in the business of

Charles L. Webster & Co., as well as its general manager.  The business

had been drained of its capital one way and another-partly by the

publication of unprofitable books; partly by the earlier demands of the

typesetter, but more than all by the manufacturing cost and agents'

commissions demanded by L. A. L.; that is to say, the eleven large

volumes constituting the Library of American Literature, which Webster

had undertaken to place in a million American homes.  There was plenty of

sale for it--indeed, that was just the trouble; for it was sold on

payments--small monthly payments--while the cost of manufacture and the

liberal agents' commissions were cash items, and it would require a

considerable period before the dribble of collections would swell into a

tide large enough to satisfy the steady outflow of expense.  A sale of

twenty-five sets a day meant prosperity on paper, but unless capital

could be raised from some other source to make and market those books

through a period of months, perhaps even years, to come, it meant

bankruptcy in reality.  It was Hall's job, with Clemens to back him, to

keep their ship afloat on these steadily ebbing financial waters.  It was

also Hall's affair to keep Mark Twain cheerful, to look pleasant himself,

and to show how they were steadily getting rich because orders were

pouring in, though a cloud that resembled bankruptcy loomed always a

little higher upon the horizon.  If Hall had not been young and an

optimist, he would have been frightened out of his boots early in the

game.  As it was, he made a brave steady fight, kept as cheerful and

stiff an upper lip as possible, always hoping that something would

happen--some grand sale of his other books, some unexpected inflow from

the type-setter interests--anything that would sustain his ship until the

L. A. L.  tide should turn and float it into safety.



Clemens had faith in Hall and was fond of him.  He never found fault with

him; he tried to accept his encouraging reports at their face value.  He

lent the firm every dollar of his literary earnings not absolutely needed

for the family's support; he signed new notes; he allowed Mrs. Clemens to

put in such remnants of her patrimony as the type-setter had spared.



The situation in 1893 was about as here outlined.  The letters to Hall of

that year are frequent and carry along the story.  To any who had formed

the idea that Mark Twain was irascible, exacting, and faultfinding, they

will perhaps be a revelation.





                      To Fred J. Hall, in New York:



                                             FLORENCE, Jan. 1, '93.

DEAR MR. HALL,--Yours of Dec. 19 is to hand, and Mrs. Clemens is deeply

distressed, for she thinks I have been blaming you or finding fault with

you about something.  But most surely that cannot be.  I tell her that

although I am prone to write hasty and regrettable things to other

people, I am not a bit likely to write such things to you.  I can't

believe I have done anything so ungrateful.  If I have, pile coals of

fire on my head, for I deserve it!



I wonder if my letter of credit isn't an encumbrance?  Do you have to

deposit the whole amount it calls for?  If that is so, it is an

encumbrance, and we must withdraw it and take the money out of soak.

I have never made drafts upon it except when compelled, because I thought

you deposited nothing against it, and only had to put up money that I

drew upon it; that therefore the less I drew the easier it would be for

you.



I am dreadfully sorry I didn't know it would be a help to you to let my

monthly check pass over a couple of months.  I could have stood that by

drawing what is left of Mrs. Clemens's letter of credit, and we would

have done it cheerfully.



I will write Whitmore to send you the "Century" check for $1,000, and you

can collect Mrs. Dodge's $2,000 (Whitmore has power of attorney which I

think will enable him to endorse it over to you in my name.) If you need

that $3,000 put it in the business and use it, and send Whitmore the

Company's note for a year.  If you don't need it, turn it over to Mr.

Halsey and let him invest it for me.



I've a mighty poor financial head, and I may be all wrong--but tell me if

I am wrong in supposing that in lending my own firm money at 6 per cent I

pay 4 of it myself and so really get only a per cent?  Now don't laugh if

that is stupid.



Of course my friend declined to buy a quarter interest in the L. A. L.

for $200,000.  I judged he would.  I hoped he would offer $100,000, but

he didn't.  If the cholera breaks out in America, a few months hence, we

can't borrow or sell; but if it doesn't we must try hard to raise

$100,000.  I wish we could do it before there is a cholera scare.



I have been in bed two or three days with a cold, but I got up an hour

ago, and I believe I am all right again.



How I wish I had appreciated the need of $100,000 when I was in New York

last summer!  I would have tried my best to raise it.  It would make us

able to stand 1,000 sets of L. A. L.  per month, but not any more, I

guess.



You have done magnificently with the business, and we must raise the

money somehow, to enable you to reap the reward of all that labor.

                              Sincerely Yours

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.





"Whitmore," in this letter, was F. G. Whitmore, of Hartford, Mark Twain's

financial agent.  The money due from Mrs. Dodge was a balance on Tom

Sawyer Abroad, which had been accepted by St. Nicholas.  Mr. Halsey was a

down-town broker.



Clemens, who was growing weary of the constant demands of L. A. L., had

conceived the idea that it would be well to dispose of a portion of it

for enough cash to finance its manufacture.



We don't know who the friend was to whom he offered a quarter interest

for the modest sum of two hundred thousand dollars.  But in the next

letter we discover designs on a certain very canny Scotchman of Skibo.





                      To Fred J. Hall, in New York:



                                             FLORENCE, Jan. 28, '92.

DEAR MR. HALL,--I want to throw out a suggestion and see what you think

of it.  We have a good start, and solid ground under us; we have a

valuable reputation; our business organization is practical, sound and

well-devised; our publications are of a respect-worthy character and of a

money-breeding species.  Now then I think that the association with us of

some one of great name and with capital would give our business a

prodigious impetus--that phrase is not too strong.



As I look at it, it is not money merely that is needed; if that were all,

the firm has friends enough who would take an interest in a paying

venture; we need some one who has made his life a success not only from a

business standpoint, but with that achievement back of him, has been

great enough to make his power felt as a thinker and a literary man.  It

is a pretty usual thing for publishers to have this sort of partners.

Now you see what a power Carnegie is, and how far his voice reaches in

the several lines I speak of.  Do you know him?  You do by correspondence

or purely business talks about his books--but personally, I mean? so that

it would not be an intrusion for you to speak to him about this desire of

mine--for I would like you to put it before him, and if you fail to

interest him in it, you will probably get at least some valuable

suggestions from him.  I'll enclose a note of introduction--you needn't

use it if you don't need to.

                                   Yours S. L. C.



P. S.  Yes, I think I have already acknowledged the Dec.  $1,000 and the

Jan. $500--and if another $500 was mailed 3 days ago there's no hiatus.



I think I also reminded you that the new letter of credit does not cover

the unexpended balance of the old one but falls considerably short of it.



Do your best with Carnegie, and don't wait to consider any of my

intermediate suggestions or talks about our raising half of the $200,000

ourselves.  I mean, wait for nothing.  To make my suggestion available I

should have to go over and see Arnot, and I don't want to until I can

mention Carnegie's name to him as going in with us.



My book is type-written and ready for print--"Pudd'nhead Wilson-a Tale."

(Or, "Those Extraordinary Twins," if preferable.)



It makes 82,500 words--12,000 more than Huck Finn.  But I don't know what

to do with it.  Mrs. Clemens thinks it wouldn't do to go to the Am. Pub.

Co. or anywhere outside of our own house; we have no subscription

machinery, and a book in the trade is a book thrown away, as far as

money-profit goes.  I am in a quandary.  Give me a lift out of it.



I will mail the book to you and get you to examine it and see if it is

good or if it is bad.  I think it is good, and I thought the Claimant

bad, when I saw it in print; but as for real judgment, I think I am

destitute of it.



I am writing a companion to the Prince and Pauper, which is half done and

will make 200,000 words; and I have had the idea that if it were gotten

up in handsome style, with many illustrations and put at a high enough

price maybe the L. A. L.  canvassers would take it and run it with that

book.  Would they?  It could be priced anywhere from $4 up to $10,

according to how it was gotten up, I suppose.



I don't want it to go into a magazine.

                                             S. L. C.



I am having several short things type-"writered."  I will send them to

you presently.  I like the Century and Harper's, but I don't know that I

have any business to object to the Cosmopolitan if they pay as good

rates.  I suppose a man ought to stick to one magazine, but that may be

only superstition.  What do you think?

                                             S. L. C.





     "The companion to The Prince and the Pauper," mentioned in this

     letter, was the story of Joan of Arc, perhaps the most finished of

     Mark Twain's literary productions.  His interest in Joan had been

     first awakened when, as a printer's apprentice in Hannibal, he had

     found blowing along the street a stray leaf from some printed story

     of her life.  That fragment of history had pictured Joan in prison,

     insulted and mistreated by ruffians.  It had aroused all the

     sympathy and indignation in the boy, Sam Clemens; also, it had

     awakened his interest in history, and, indeed, in all literature.



     His love for the character of Joan had grown with the years, until

     in time he had conceived the idea of writing her story.  As far back

     as the early eighties he had collected material for it, and had

     begun to make the notes.  One thing and another had interfered, and

     he had found no opportunity for such a story.  Now, however, in

     Florence, in the ancient villa, and in the quiet garden, looking

     across the vineyards and olive groves to the dream city along the

     Arno, he felt moved to take up the tale of the shepherd girl of

     France, the soldier maid, or, as he called her, "The noble child,

     the most innocent, the most lovely, the most adorable the ages have

     produced."  His surroundings and background would seem to have been

     perfect, and he must have written with considerable ease to have

     completed a hundred thousand words in a period of not more than six

     weeks.



     Perhaps Hall did not even go to see Carnegie; at all events nothing

     seems to have come of the idea.  Once, at a later time, Mask Twain

     himself mentioned the matter to Carnegie, and suggested to him that

     it was poor financiering to put all of one's eggs into one basket,

     meaning into iron.  But Carnegie answered, "That's a mistake; put

     all your eggs into one basket and watch that basket."



     It was March when Clemens felt that once more his presence was

     demanded in America.  He must see if anything could be realized from

     the type-setter or L. A. L.





                      To Fred J. Hall, in New York:



                                                       March 13, '93.

DEAR MR. HALL,--I am busy getting ready to sail the 22d, in the Kaiser

Wilhelm II.



I send herewith 2 magazine articles.



The Story contains 3,800 to 4,000 words.



The "Diary" contains 3,800 words.



Each would make about 4 pages of the Century.



The Diary is a gem, if I do say it myself that shouldn't.



If the Cosmopolitan wishes to pay $600 for either of them or $1,200 for

both, gather in the check, and I will use the money in America instead of

breaking into your treasury.



If they don't wish to trade for either, send the articles to the Century,

without naming a price, and if their check isn't large enough I will call

and abuse them when I come.



I signed and mailed the notes yesterday.

                                        Yours

                                             S. L. C.





     Clemens reached New York on the 3d of April and made a trip to

     Chicago, but accomplished nothing, except to visit the World's Fair

     and be laid up with a severe cold.  The machine situation had not

     progressed.  The financial stringency of 1893 had brought everything

     to a standstill.  The New York bank would advance Webster & Co. no

     more money.  So disturbed were his affairs, so disordered was

     everything, that sometimes he felt himself as one walking amid

     unrealities.  A fragment of a letter to Mrs. Crane conveys this:



     "I dreamed I was born and grew up and was a pilot on the Mississippi

     and a miner and a journalist in Nevada and a pilgrim in the Quaker

     City, and had a wife and children and went to live in a villa at

     Florence--and this dream goes on and on and sometimes seems so real

     that I almost believe it is real.  I wonder if it is?  But there is

     no way to tell, for if one applies tests they would be part of the

     dream, too, and so would simply aid the deceit.  I wish I knew

     whether it is a dream or real."



     He saw Warner, briefly, in America; also Howells, now living in New

     York, but he had little time for visiting.  On May 13th he sailed

     again for Europe on the Kaiser Wilhelm II.  On the night before

     sailing he sent Howells a good-by word.





                   To W. D. Howells, in New York City:



                              MURRAY HILL HOTEL, NEW YORE, May 12, 1893.

                                                            Midnight.

DEAR HOWELLS--I am so sorry I missed you.



I am very glad to have that book for sea entertainment, and I thank you

ever so much for it.



I've had a little visit with Warner at last; I was getting afraid I

wasn't going to have a chance to see him at all.  I forgot to tell you

how thoroughly I enjoyed your account of the country printing office, and

how true it all was and how intimately recognizable in all its details.

But Warner was full of delight over it, and that reminded me, and I am

glad, for I wanted to speak of it.



You have given me a book; Annie Trumbull has sent me her book; I bought a

couple of books; Mr. Hall gave me a choice German book; Laflan gave me

two bottles of whisky and a box of cigars--I go to sea nobly equipped.



Good-bye and all good fortune attend you and yours--and upon you all I

leave my benediction.

                              MARK.





     Mention has already been made of the Ross home being very near to

     Viviani, and the association of the Ross and Clemens families.

     There was a fine vegetable garden on the Ross estate, and it was in

     the interest of it that the next letter was written to the Secretary

     of Agriculture.





            To Hon. J. Sterling Morton, in Washington, D. C.:

           Editorial Department Century Magazine, Union Square,



                                             NEW YORK, April 6, 1893.

TO THE HON. J. STERLING MORTON,--Dear Sir: Your petitioner, Mark Twain,

a poor farmer of Connecticut--indeed, the poorest one there, in the

opinion of many-desires a few choice breeds of seed corn (maize), and in

return will zealously support the Administration in all ways honorable

and otherwise.



To speak by the card, I want these things to hurry to Italy to an English

lady.  She is a neighbor of mine outside of Florence, and has a great

garden and thinks she could raise corn for her table if she had the right

ammunition.  I myself feel a warm interest in this enterprise, both on

patriotic grounds and because I have a key to that garden, which I got

made from a wax impression.  It is not very good soil, still I think she

can grow enough for one table and I am in a position to select the table.

If you are willing to aid and abet a countryman (and Gilder thinks you

are,) please find the signature and address of your petitioner below.



Respectfully and truly yours.

                              MARK TWAIN,



67 Fifth Avenue, New York.



P. S.--A handful of choice (Southern) watermelon seeds would pleasantly

add to that lady's employments and give my table a corresponding lift.





     His idea of business values had moderated considerably by the time

     he had returned to Florence.  He was not hopeless yet, but he was

     clearly a good deal disheartened--anxious for freedom.





                      To Fred J.  Hall, in New York:



                                                  FLORENCE May 30, '93

DEAR MR. HALL,--You were to cable me if you sold any machine royalties

--so I judge you have not succeeded.



This has depressed me.  I have been looking over the past year's letters

and statements and am depressed still more.



I am terribly tired of business.  I am by nature and disposition unfitted

for it and I want to get out of it.  I am standing on the Mount Morris

volcano with help from the machine a long way off--doubtless a long way

further off than the Connecticut Co. imagines.



Now here is my idea for getting out.



The firm owes Mrs. Clemens and me--I do not know quite how much, but it

is about $170,000 or $175,000, I suppose (I make this guess from the

documents here, whose technicalities confuse me horribly.)



The firm owes other sums, but there is stock and cash assets to cover the

entire indebtedness and $116,679.20 over.  Is that it?  In addition we

have the L. A. L. plates and copyright, worth more than $130,000--is

that correct?



That is to say, we have property worth about $250,000 above indebtedness,

I suppose--or, by one of your estimates, $300,000?  The greater part of

the first debts to me is in notes paying 6 percent.  The rest (the old

$70,000 or whatever it is) pays no interest.



Now then, will Harper or Appleton, or Putnam give me $200,000 for those

debts and my two-thirds interest in the firm?  (The firm of course taking

the Mount Morris and all such obligations off my hands and leaving me

clear of all responsibility.)



I don't want much money.  I only want first class notes--$200,000 worth

of them at 6 per cent, payable monthly;--yearly notes, renewable annually

for 3 years, with $5,000 of the principal payable at the beginning and

middle of each year.  After that, the notes renewable annually and

(perhaps) a larger part of the principal payable semi-annually.



Please advise me and suggest alterations and emendations of the above

scheme, for I need that sort of help, being ignorant of business and not

able to learn a single detail of it.



Such a deal would make it easy for a big firm to pour in a big cash

capital and jump L. A. L. up to enormous prosperity.  Then your one-third

would be a fortune--and I hope to see that day!



I enclose an authority to use with Whitmore in case you have sold any

royalties.  But if you can't make this deal don't make any.  Wait a

little and see if you can't make the deal.  Do make the deal if you

possibly can.  And if any presence shall be necessary in order to

complete it I will come over, though I hope it can be done without that.



Get me out of business!



And I will be yours forever gratefully,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.



My idea is, that I am offering my 2/3 of L. A. L. and the business for

thirty or forty thousand dollars.  Is that it?



P. S. S.  The new firm could retain my books and reduce them to a

10 percent royalty.                 S. L. C.





                  To Rev. Jos. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                              VILLA VIVIANI, SETTIGNANO (FLORENCE)

                                                       June 9, '93.

DEAR JOE,--The sea voyage set me up and I reached here May 27 in

tolerable condition--nothing left but weakness, cough all gone.



Old Sir Henry Layard was here the other day, visiting our neighbor Janet

Ross, daughter of Lady Duff Gordon, and since then I have been reading

his account of the adventures of his youth in the far East.  In a

footnote he has something to say about a sailor which I thought might

interest you--viz:



"This same quartermaster was celebrated among the English in Mesopotamia

for an entry which he made in his log-book-after a perilous storm; 'The

windy and watery elements raged.  Tears and prayers was had recourse to,

but was of no manner of use.  So we hauled up the anchor and got round

the point.'"



There--it isn't Ned Wakeman; it was before his day.



               With love,

                         MARK.





     They closed Villa Viviani in June and near the end of the month

     arrived in Munich in order that Mrs. Clemens might visit some of the

     German baths.  The next letter is written by her and shows her deep

     sympathy with Hall in his desperate struggle.  There have been few

     more unselfish and courageous women in history than Mark Twain's

     wife.





               From Mrs. Clemens to Mr. Hall, in New York:



                                                  June 27th 1893

                                                  MUNICH.

DEAR MR. HALL,--Your letter to Mr. Clemens of June 16th has just reached

here; as he has gone to Berlin for Clara I am going to send you just a

line in answer to it.



Mr. Clemens did not realize what trouble you would be in when his letter

should reach you or he would not have sent it just then.  I hope you will

not worry any more than you can help.  Do not let our interests weigh on

you too heavily.  We both know you will, as you always have, look in

every way to the best interests of all.



I think Mr. Clemens is right in feeling that he should get out of

business, that he is not fitted for it; it worries him too much.



But he need be in no haste about it, and of course, it would be the very

farthest from his desire to imperil, in the slightest degree, your

interests in order to save his own.



I am sure that I voice his wish as well as mine when I say that he would

simply like you to bear in mind the fact that he greatly desires to be

released from his present anxiety and worry, at a time when it shall not

endanger your interest or the safety of the business.



I am more sorry than I can express that this letter of Mr. Clemens'

should have reached you when you were struggling under such terrible

pressure.  I hope now that the weight is not quite so heavy.  He would

not have written you about the money if he had known that it was an

inconvenience for you to send it.  He thought the book-keeper whose duty

it is to forward it had forgotten.



We can draw on Mr. Langdon for money for a few weeks until things are a

little easier with you.  As Mr. Clemens wrote you we would say "do not

send us any more money at present" if we were not afraid to do so.  I

will say, however, do not trouble yourself if for a few weeks you are not

able to send the usual amount.



Mr. Clemens and I have the greatest possible desire, not to increase in

any way your burdens, and sincerely wish we might aid you.



I trust my brother may be able, in his talk with you, to throw some

helpful light on the situation.



Hoping you will see a change for the better and begin to reap the fruit

of your long and hard labor.

               Believe me

                    Very Cordially yours

                              OLIVIA L. CLEMENS.





Hall, naturally, did not wish to be left alone with the business.  He

realized that his credit would suffer, both at the bank and with the

public, if his distinguished partner should retire.  He wrote, therefore,

proposing as an alternate that they dispose of the big subscription set

that was swamping them.  It was a good plan--if it would work--and we

find Clemens entering into it heartily.





                      To Fred J.  Hall, in New York:



                                             MUNICH, July 3, '93.

DEAR MR. HALL,--You make a suggestion which has once or twice flitted

dimly through my mind heretofore to wit, sell L. A. L.



I like that better than the other scheme, for it is no doubt feasible,

whereas the other is perhaps not.



The firm is in debt, but L. A. L. is free--and not only free but has

large money owing to it.  A proposition to sell that by itself to a big

house could be made without embarrassment we merely confess that we

cannot spare capital from the rest of the business to run it on the huge

scale necessary to make it an opulent success.



It will be selling a good thing--for somebody; and it will be getting rid

of a load which we are clearly not able to carry.  Whoever buys will have

a noble good opening--a complete equipment, a well organized business,

a capable and experienced manager, and enterprise not experimental but

under full sail, and immediately able to pay 50 per cent a year on every

dollar the publisher shall actually invest in it--I mean in making and

selling the books.



I am miserably sorry to be adding bothers and torments to the over-supply

which you already have in these hideous times, but I feel so troubled,

myself, considering the dreary fact that we are getting deeper and deeper

in debt and the L. A. L.  getting to be a heavier and heavier burden all

the time, that I must bestir myself and seek a way of relief.



It did not occur to me that in selling out I would injure you--for that I

am not going to do.  But to sell L. A. L. will not injure you it will put

you in better shape.

               Sincerely Yours

                         S. L. CLEMENS.





                      To Fred J.  Hall, in New York:



                                                  July 8, '92.

DEAR MR. HALL,--I am sincerely glad you are going to sell L. A. L.  I am

glad you are shutting off the agents, and I hope the fatal book will be

out of our hands before it will be time to put them on again.  With

nothing but our non-existent capital to work with the book has no value

for us, rich a prize as it will be to any competent house that gets it.



I hope you are making an effort to sell before you discharge too many

agents, for I suppose the agents are a valuable part of the property.



We have been stopping in Munich for awhile, but we shall make a break for

some country resort in a few days now.

                         Sincerely Yours

                                   S. L. C.



                                                            July 8

P. S.  No, I suppose I am wrong in suggesting that you wait a moment

before discharging your L. A. L.  agents--in fact I didn't mean that.

I judge your only hope of salvation is in discharging them all at once,

since it is their commissions that threaten to swamp us.  It is they who

have eaten up the $14,000 I left with you in such a brief time, no doubt.



I feel panicky.



I think the sale might be made with better advantage, however, now, than

later when the agents have got out of the purchaser's reach.

                                   S. L. C.



P. S.  No monthly report for many months.





     Those who are old enough to remember the summer of 1893 may recall

     it as a black financial season.  Banks were denying credit,

     businesses were forced to the wall.  It was a poor time to float any

     costly enterprise.  The Chicago company who was trying to build the

     machines made little progress.  The book business everywhere was

     bad.  In a brief note following the foregoing letters Clemens wrote

     Hall:



     "It is now past the middle of July and no cablegram to say the

     machine is finished.  We are afraid you are having miserable days

     and worried nights, and we sincerely wish we could relieve you, but

     it is all black with us and we don't know any helpful thing to say

     or do."



     He inclosed some kind of manuscript proposition for John Brisben

     Walker, of the Cosmopolitan, with the comment: "It is my ingenious

     scheme to protect the family against the alms-house for one more

     year--and after that--well, goodness knows!  I have never felt so

     desperate in my life--and good reason, for I haven't got a penny to

     my name, and Mrs. Clemens hasn't enough laid up with Langdon to keep

     us two months."



     It was like Mark Twain, in the midst of all this turmoil, to project

     an entirely new enterprise; his busy mind was always visioning

     success in unusual undertakings, regardless of immediate conditions

     and the steps necessary to achievement.





                      To Fred J.  Hall, in New York:



                                                       July 26, '93.

DEAR MR. HALL,--..... I hope the machine will be finished this month;

but it took me four years and cost me $100,000 to finish the other

machine after it was apparently entirely complete and setting type like a

house-afire.



I wonder what they call "finished."  After it is absolutely perfect it

can't go into a printing-office until it has had a month's wear, running

night and day, to get the bearings smooth, I judge.



I may be able to run over about mid-October.  Then if I find you relieved

of L. A. L.  we will start a magazine inexpensive, and of an entirely

unique sort.  Arthur Stedman and his father editors of it.  Arthur could

do all the work, merely submitting it to his father for approval.



The first number should pay--and all subsequent ones--25 cents a number.

Cost of first number (20,000 copies) $2,000.  Give most of them away,

sell the rest.  Advertising and other expenses--cost unknown.  Send one

to all newspapers--it would get a notice--favorable, too.



But we cannot undertake it until L. A. L, is out of the way.  With our

hands free and some capital to spare, we could make it hum.



Where is the Shelley article?  If you have it on hand, keep it and I will

presently tell you what to do with it.



Don't forget to tell me.

                         Yours Sincerely

                                   S. L. C.





     The Shelley article mentioned in this letter was the "Defense of

     Harriet Sheller," one of the very best of his essays.  How he could

     have written this splendid paper at a time of such distraction

     passes comprehension.  Furthermore, it is clear that he had revised,

     indeed rewritten, the long story of Pudd'nhead Wilson.





                      To Fred J. Hall, in New York:



                                                  July 30, '93.

DEAR MR. HALL,--This time "Pudd'nhead Wilson" is a success!  Even Mrs.

Clemens, the most difficult of critics, confesses it, and without

reserves or qualifications.  Formerly she would not consent that it be

published either before or after my death.  I have pulled the twins apart

and made two individuals of them; I have sunk them out of sight, they are

mere flitting shadows, now, and of no importance; their story has

disappeared from the book.  Aunt Betsy Hale has vanished wholly, leaving

not a trace behind; aunt Patsy Cooper and her daughter Rowena have almost

disappeared--they scarcely walk across the stage.  The whole story is

centered on the murder and the trial; from the first chapter the movement

is straight ahead without divergence or side-play to the murder and the

trial; everything that is done or said or that happens is a preparation

for those events.  Therefore, 3 people stand up high, from beginning to

end, and only 3--Pudd'nhead, "Tom" Driscoll, and his nigger mother,

Roxana; none of the others are important, or get in the way of the story

or require the reader's attention.  Consequently, the scenes and episodes

which were the strength of the book formerly are stronger than ever, now.



When I began this final reconstruction the story contained 81,500 words,

now it contains only 58,000.  I have knocked out everything that delayed

the march of the story--even the description of a Mississippi steamboat.

There's no weather in, and no scenery--the story is stripped for flight!



Now, then what is she worth?  The amount of matter is but 3,000 words

short of the American Claimant, for which the syndicate paid $12,500.

There was nothing new in that story, but the finger-prints in this one

is virgin ground--absolutely fresh, and mighty curious and interesting

to everybody.



I don't want any more syndicating--nothing short of $20,000, anyway, and

that I can't get--but won't you see how much the Cosmopolitan will stand?



Do your best for me, for I do not sleep these nights, for visions of the

poor-house.



This in spite of the hopeful tone of yours of 11th to Langdon (just

received) for in me hope is very nearly expiring.  Everything does look

so blue, so dismally blue!



By and by I shall take up the Rhone open-boat voyage again, but not now

--we are going to be moving around too much.  I have torn up some of it,

but still have 15,000 words that Mrs. Clemens approves of, and that I

like.  I may go at it in Paris again next winter, but not unless I know I

can write it to suit me.



Otherwise I shall tackle Adam once more, and do him in a kind of a

friendly and respectful way that will commend him to the Sunday schools.

I've been thinking out his first life-days to-day and framing his

childish and ignorant impressions and opinions for him.



Will ship Pudd'nhead in a few days.  When you get it cable



                    Mark Twain

                         Care Brownship, London

                                        Received.



I mean to ship "Pudd'nhead Wilson" to you-say, tomorrow.  It'll furnish

me hash for awhile I reckon.  I am almost sorry it is finished; it was

good entertainment to work at it, and kept my mind away from things.



We leave here in about ten days, but the doctors have changed our plans

again.  I think we shall be in Bohemia or thereabouts till near the end

of September, then go to Paris and take a rest.

                         Yours Sincerely

                                        S. L. C.



P. S.  Mrs. Clemens has come in since, and read your letter and is deeply

distressed.  She thinks that in some letter of mine I must have

reproached you.  She says it is wonderful that you have kept the ship

afloat in this storm that has seen fleets and fleets go down; that from

what she learns of the American business-situation from her home letters

you have accomplished a marvel in the circumstances, and that she cannot

bear to have a word said to you that shall voice anything but praise and

the heartiest appreciation--and not the shadow of a reproach will she

allow.



I tell her I didn't reproach you and never thought of such a thing.  And

I said I would break open my letter and say so.



Mrs. Clemens says I must tell you not to send any money for a month or

two--so that you may be afforded what little relief is in our power.

All right--I'm willing; (this is honest) but I wish Brer Chatto would

send along his little yearly contribution.  I dropped him a line about

another matter a week ago--asked him to subscribe for the Daily News for

me--you see I wanted to remind him in a covert way that it was pay-up

time--but doubtless I directed the letter to you or some one else, for I

don't hear from him and don't get any Daily News either.





To Fred J.  Hall, in New York:



                                             Aug.  6, '93.

DEAR MR. HALL,--I am very sorry--it was thoughtless in me.  Let the

reports go.  Send me once a month two items, and two only:



Cash liabilities--(so much)

Cash assets--(so much)



I can perceive the condition of the business at a glance, then, and that

will be sufficient.



Here we never see a newspaper, but even if we did I could not come

anywhere near appreciating or correctly estimating the tempest you have

been buffeting your way through--only the man who is in it can do that

--but I have tried not to burden you thoughtlessly or wantonly.  I have

been wrought and unsettled in mind by apprehensions, and that is a thing

that is not helpable when one is in a strange land and sees his resources

melt down to a two months' supply and can't see any sure daylight beyond.

The bloody machine offered but a doubtful outlook--and will still offer

nothing much better for a long time to come; for when Davis's "three

weeks" is up there's three months' tinkering to follow I guess.  That is

unquestionably the boss machine of the world, but is the toughest one on

prophets, when it is in an incomplete state, that has ever seen the

light.  Neither Davis nor any other man can foretell with any

considerable approach to certainty when it will be ready to get down to

actual work in a printing office.



                             [No signature.]





     Three days after the foregoing letter was written he wrote, briefly:



     "Great Scott but it's a long year-for you and me!  I never knew the

     almanac to drag so.  At least since I was finishing that other

     machine.



     "I watch for your letters hungrily--just as I used to watch for the

     cablegram saying the machine's finished; but when 'next week

     certainly' swelled into 'three weeks sure' I recognized the old

     familiar tune I used to hear so much.  Ward don't know what

     sick-heartedness is--but he is in a way to find out."



     Always the quaint form of his humor, no matter how dark the way.

     We may picture him walking the floor, planning, scheming, and

     smoking--always smoking--trying to find a way out.  It was not the

     kind of scheming that many men have done under the circumstances;

     not scheming to avoid payment of debts, but to pay them.





                      To Fred J. Hall, in New York:



                                                       Aug. 14, '93

DEAR MR. HALL,--I am very glad indeed if you and Mr. Langdon are able to

see any daylight ahead.  To me none is visible.  I strongly advise that

every penny that comes in shall be applied to paying off debts.  I may be

in error about this, but it seems to me that we have no other course

open.  We can pay a part of the debts owing to outsiders--none to the

Clemenses.  In very prosperous times we might regard our stock and

copyrights as assets sufficient, with the money owing to us, to square up

and quit even, but I suppose we may not hope for such luck in the present

condition of things.



What I am mainly hoping for, is to save my royalties.  If they come into

danger I hope you will cable me, so that I can come over and try to save

them, for if they go I am a beggar.



I would sail to-day if I had anybody to take charge of my family and help

them through the difficult journeys commanded by the doctors.  I may be

able to sail ten days hence; I hope so, and expect so.



We can never resurrect the L. A. L.  I would not spend any more money on

that book.  You spoke, a while back, of trying to start it up again as a

preparation to disposing of it, but we are not in shape to venture that,

I think.  It would require more borrowing, and we must not do that.

                    Yours Sincerely

                              S. L. C.



Aug.  16.  I have thought, and thought, but I don't seem to arrive in any

very definite place.  Of course you will not have an instant's safety

until the bank debts are paid.  There is nothing to be thought of but to

hand over every penny as fast as it comes in--and that will be slow

enough!  Or could you secure them by pledging part of our cash assets

and--



I am coming over, just as soon as I can get the family moved and settled.

                                             S. L. C.





     Two weeks following this letter he could endure the suspense no

     longer, and on August 29th sailed once more for America.  In New

     York, Clemens settled down at the Players Club, where he could live

     cheaply, and undertook some literary work while he was casting about

     for ways and means to relieve the financial situation.  Nothing

     promising occurred, until one night at the Murray Hill Hotel he was

     introduced by Dr. Clarence C. Rice to Henry H. Rogers, of the

     Standard Oil group of financiers.  Rogers had a keen sense of humor

     and had always been a great admirer of Mark Twain's work.  It was a

     mirthful evening, and certainly an eventful one in Mark Twain's

     life.  A day or two later Doctor Rice asked the millionaire to

     interest himself a little in Clemens's business affairs, which he

     thought a good deal confused.  Just what happened is not remembered

     now, but from the date of the next letter we realize that a

     discussion of the matter by Clemens and Rogers must have followed

     pretty promptly.





                       To Mrs. Clemens, in Europe:



                                                  Oct. 18, '93.

DEAR, DEAR SWEETHEART,--I don't seem to get even half a chance to write

you, these last two days, and yet there's lots to say.



Apparently everything is at last settled as to the giveaway of L. A. L.,

and the papers will be signed and the transfer made to-morrow morning.



Meantime I have got the best and wisest man in the whole Standard Oil

group of mufti-millionaires a good deal interested in looking into the

type-setter (this is private, don't mention it.) He has been searching

into that thing for three weeks, and yesterday he said to me, "I find the

machine to be all you represented it--I have here exhaustive reports from

my own experts, and I know every detail of its capacity, its immense

value, its construction, cost, history, and all about its inventor's

character.  I know that the New York Co. and the Chicago Co. are both

stupid, and that they are unbusinesslike people, destitute of money and

in a hopeless boggle."



Then he told me the scheme he had planned, then said: "If I can arrange

with these people on this basis--it will take several weeks to find out

--I will see to it that they get the money they need.  Then the thing will

move right along and your royalties will cease to be waste paper.  I will

post you the minute my scheme fails or succeeds.  In the meantime, you

stop walking the floor.  Go off to the country and try to be gay.  You

may have to go to walking again, but don't begin till I tell you my

scheme has failed."  And he added: "Keep me posted always as to where you

are--for if I need you and can use you--I want to know where to put my

hand on you."



If I should even divulge the fact that the Standard Oil is merely talking

remotely about going into the type-setter, it would send my royalties up.



With worlds and worlds of love and kisses to you all,

                                                       SAML.





With so great a burden of care shifted to the broad financial shoulders

of H. H. Rogers, Mark Twain's spirits went ballooning, soaring toward the

stars.  He awoke, too, to some of the social gaieties about him, and

found pleasure in the things that in the hour of his gloom had seemed

mainly mockery.  We find him going to a Sunday evening at Howells's, to

John Mackay's, and elsewhere.





                        To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris:



                                                       Dec. 2, '93.

LIVY DARLING,--Last night at John Mackay's the dinner consisted of soup,

raw oysters, corned beef and cabbage, and something like a custard.

I ate without fear or stint, and yet have escaped all suggestion of

indigestion.  The men present were old gray Pacific-coasters whom I knew

when I and they were young and not gray.  The talk was of the days when

we went gypsying a long time ago--thirty years.  Indeed it was a talk of

the dead.  Mainly that.  And of how they looked, and the harum-scarum

things they did and said.  For there were no cares in that life, no aches

and pains, and not time enough in the day (and three-fourths of the

night) to work off one's surplus vigor and energy.  Of the mid-night

highway robbery joke played upon me with revolvers at my head on the

windswept and desolate Gold Hill Divide, no witness is left but me, the

victim.  All the friendly robbers are gone.  These old fools last night

laughed till they cried over the particulars of that old forgotten crime.



John Mackay has no family here but a pet monkey--a most affectionate and

winning little devil.  But he makes trouble for the servants, for he is

full of curiosity and likes to take everything out of the drawers and

examine it minutely; and he puts nothing back.  The examinations of

yesterday count for nothing to-day--he makes a new examination every day.

But he injures nothing.



I went with Laffan to the Racquet Club the other night and played,

billiards two hours without starting up any rheumatism.  I suppose it was

all really taken out of me in Berlin.



Richard Harding Davis spoke yesterday of Clara's impersonations at Mrs.

Van Rensselaer's here and said they were a wonderful piece of work.



Livy dear, I do hope you are comfortable, as to quarters and food at the

Hotel Brighton.  But if you're not don't stay there.  Make one more

effort--don't give it up.  Dear heart, this is from one who loves you

--which is Saml.





     It was decided that Rogers and Clemens should make a trip to Chicago

     to investigate personally the type-setter situation there.  Clemens

     reports the details of the excursion to Mrs. Clemens in a long

     subdivided letter, most of which has no general interest and is here

     omitted.  The trip, as a whole, would seem to have been

     satisfactory.  The personal portions of the long Christmas letter

     may properly be preserved.





                        To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris:



                                             THE PLAYERS, Xmas, 1893.

                                  No. 1.

Merry Xmas, my darling, and all my darlings!  I arrived from Chicago

close upon midnight last night, and wrote and sent down my Christmas

cablegram before undressing: "Merry Xmas!  Promising progress made in

Chicago."  It would get to the telegraph office toward 8 this morning and

reach you at luncheon.



I was vaguely hoping, all the past week, that my Xmas cablegram would be

definite, and make you all jump with jubilation; but the thought always

intruded itself, "You are not going out there to negotiate with a man,

but with a louse.  This makes results uncertain."



I was asleep as Christmas struck upon the clock at mid night, and didn't

wake again till two hours ago.  It is now half past 10 Xmas morning; I

have had my coffee and bread, and shan't get out of bed till it is time

to dress for Mrs. Laflan's Christmas dinner this evening--where I shall

meet Bram Stoker and must make sure about that photo with Irving's

autograph.  I will get the picture and he will attend to the rest.  In

order to remember and not forget--well, I will go there with my dress

coat wrong side out; it will cause remark and then I shall remember.





                               No. 2 and 3.

I tell you it was interesting!  The Chicago campaign, I mean.  On the way

out Mr. Rogers would plan out the campaign while I walked the floor and

smoked and assented.  Then he would close it up with a snap and drop it

and we would totally change the subject and take up the scenery, etc.



(Here follows the long detailed report of the Chicago conference, of

interest only to the parties directly concerned.)





                                  No. 4.

We had nice tripe, going and coming.  Mr. Rogers had telegraphed the

Pennsylvania Railroad for a couple of sections for us in the fast train

leaving at 2 p. m.  the 22nd.  The Vice President telegraphed back that

every berth was engaged (which was not true--it goes without saying) but

that he was sending his own car for us.  It was mighty nice and

comfortable.  In its parlor it had two sofas, which could become beds at

night.  It had four comfortably-cushioned cane arm-chairs.  It had a very

nice bedroom with a wide bed in it; which I said I would take because I

believed I was a little wider than Mr. Rogers--which turned out to be

true; so I took it.  It had a darling back-porch--railed, roofed and

roomy; and there we sat, most of the time, and viewed the scenery and

talked, for the weather was May weather, and the soft dream-pictures of

hill and river and mountain and sky were clear and away beyond anything I

have ever seen for exquisiteness and daintiness.



The colored waiter knew his business, and the colored cook was a finished

artist.  Breakfasts: coffee with real cream; beefsteaks, sausage, bacon,

chops, eggs in various ways, potatoes in various--yes, and quite

wonderful baked potatoes, and hot as fire.  Dinners--all manner of

things, including canvas-back duck, apollinaris, claret, champagne, etc.



We sat up chatting till midnight, going and coming; seldom read a line,

day or night, though we were well fixed with magazines, etc.; then I

finished off with a hot Scotch and we went to bed and slept till 9.30a.m.

I honestly tried to pay my share of hotel bills, fees, etc., but I was

not allowed--and I knew the reason why, and respected the motive.  I will

explain when I see you, and then you will understand.



We were 25 hours going to Chicago; we were there 24 hours; we were 30

hours returning.  Brisk work, but all of it enjoyable.  We insisted on

leaving the car at Philadelphia so that our waiter and cook (to whom Mr.

R. gave $10 apiece,) could have their Christmas-eve at home.



Mr. Rogers's carriage was waiting for us in Jersey City and deposited me

at the Players.  There--that's all.  This letter is to make up for the

three letterless days.  I love you, dear heart, I love you all.

                                                                 SAML.









XXXIV



LETTERS 1894.  A WINTER IN NEW YORK.  BUSINESS FAILURE.

END OF THE MACHINE



The beginning of the new year found Mark Twain sailing buoyantly on a

tide of optimism.  He believed that with H. H. Rogers as his financial

pilot he could weather safely any storm or stress.  He could divert

himself, or rest, or work, and consider his business affairs with

interest and amusement, instead of with haggard anxiety.  He ran over to

Hartford to see an amateur play; to Boston to give a charity reading; to

Fair Haven to open the library which Mr. Rogers had established there; he

attended gay dinners, receptions, and late studio parties, acquiring the

name of the "Belle of New York."  In the letters that follow we get the

echo of some of these things.  The Mrs. Rice mentioned in the next brief

letter was the wife of Dr. Clarence C. Rice, who had introduced

H. H.  Rogers to Mark Twain.





                        To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris:



                                             Jan. 12, '94

Livy darling, I came down from Hartford yesterday with Kipling, and he

and Hutton and I had the small smoking compartment to ourselves and found

him at last at his ease, and not shy.  He was very pleasant company

indeed.  He is to be in the city a week, and I wish I could invite him to

dinner, but it won't do.  I should be interrupted by business, of course.

The construction of a contract that will suit Paige's lawyer (not Paige)

turns out to be very difficult.  He is embarrassed by earlier advice to

Paige, and hates to retire from it and stultify himself.  The

negotiations are being conducted, by means of tedious long telegrams and

by talks over the long-distance telephone.  We keep the wires loaded.



Dear me, dinner is ready.  So Mrs. Rice says.



                         With worlds of love,

                                             SAML.





Clemens and Oliver Wendell Holmes had met and become friends soon after

the publication of Innocents Abroad, in 1869.  Now, twenty-five years

later, we find a record of what without doubt was their last meeting.

It occurred at the home of Mrs. James T. Field.





                        To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris:



                                             BOSTON, Jan. 25, '94.

Livy darling, I am caught out worse this time than ever before, in the

matter of letters.  Tuesday morning I was smart enough to finish and mail

my long letter to you before breakfast--for I was suspecting that I would

not have another spare moment during the day.  It turned out just so.



In a thoughtless moment I agreed to come up here and read for the poor.

I did not reflect that it would cost me three days.  I could not get

released.  Yesterday I had myself called at 8 and ran out to Mr. Rogers's

house at 9, and talked business until half past 10; then caught 11

o'clock train and arrived here at 6; was shaven and dressed by 7 and

ready for dinner here in Mrs. Field's charming house.



Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes never goes out now (he is in his 84th year,)

but he came out this time-said he wanted to "have a time" once more with

me.



Mrs. Fields said Aldrich begged to come and went away crying because she

wouldn't let him.  She allowed only her family (Sarah Orne Jewett and

sister) to be present, because much company would overtax Dr. Holmes.



Well, he was just delightful!  He did as brilliant and beautiful talking

(and listening) as ever he did in his life, I guess.  Fields and Jewett

said he hadn't been in such splendid form in years.  He had ordered his

carriage for 9.



The coachman sent in for him at 9; but he said, "Oh, nonsense!--leave

glories and grandeurs like these?  Tell him to go away and come in an

hour!"



At 10 he was called for again, and Mrs. Fields, getting uneasy, rose, but

he wouldn't go--and so we rattled ahead the same as ever.  Twice more

Mrs. Fields rose, but he wouldn't go--and he didn't go till half past 10

--an unwarrantable dissipation for him in these days.  He was

prodigiously complimentary about some of my books, and is having

Pudd'nhead read to him.  I told him you and I used the Autocrat as a

courting book and marked it all through, and that you keep it in the

sacred green box with the love letters, and it pleased him.



Good-bye, my dear darling, it is 15 minutes to dinner and I'm not dressed

yet.  I have a reception to-night and will be out very late at that place

and at Irving's Theatre where I have a complimentary box.  I wish you

were all here.

                         SAML.





     In the next letter we meet James J. Corbett--"Gentleman Jim," as he

     was sometimes called--the champion pugilist of that day.



     The Howells incident so amusingly dramatized will perhaps be more

     appreciated if the reader remembers that Mark Twain himself had at

     intervals been a mind-healing enthusiast.  Indeed, in spite of his

     strictures on Mrs. Eddy, his interest in the subject of mind-cure

     continued to the end of his life.





                        To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris:



                                                  Sunday, 9.30 a. m.

Livy dear, when we got out to the house last night, Mrs. Rogers, who is

up and around, now, didn't want to go down stairs to dinner, but Mr. R.

persuaded her and we had a very good time indeed.  By 8 o'clock we were

down again and bought a fifteen-dollar box in the Madison Square Garden

(Rogers bought it, not I,) then he went and fetched Dr. Rice while I

(went) to the Players and picked up two artists--Reid and Simmons--and

thus we filled 5 of the 6 seats.  There was a vast multitude of people in

the brilliant place.  Stanford White came along presently and invited me

to go to the World-Champion's dressing room, which I was very glad to do.

Corbett has a fine face and is modest and diffident, besides being the

most perfectly and beautifully constructed human animal in the world.

I said:



"You have whipped Mitchell, and maybe you will whip Jackson in June--but

you are not done, then.  You will have to tackle me."



He answered, so gravely that one might easily have thought him in

earnest:



"No--I am not going to meet you in the ring.  It is not fair or right to

require it.  You might chance to knock me out, by no merit of your own,

but by a purely accidental blow; and then my reputation would be gone and

you would have a double one.  You have got fame enough and you ought not

to want to take mine away from me."



Corbett was for a long time a clerk in the Nevada Bank in San Francisco.



There were lots of little boxing matches, to entertain the crowd: then at

last Corbett appeared in the ring and the 8,000 people present went mad

with enthusiasm.  My two artists went mad about his form.  They said they

had never seen anything that came reasonably near equaling its perfection

except Greek statues, and they didn't surpass it.



Corbett boxed 3 rounds with the middle-weight Australian champion--oh,

beautiful to see!--then the show was over and we struggled out through a

perfect wash of humanity.  When we reached the street I found I had left

my arctics in the box.  I had to have them, so Simmons said he would go

back and get them, and I didn't dissuade him.  I couldn't see how he was

going to make his way a single yard into that solid oncoming wave of

people--yet he must plow through it full 50 yards.  He was back with the

shoes in 3 minutes!



How do you reckon he accomplished that miracle?  By saying:



"Way, gentlemen, please--coming to fetch Mr. Corbett's overshoes."



The word flew from mouth to mouth, the Red Sea divided, and Simmons

walked comfortably through and back, dry shod.  Simmons (this was

revealed to me under seal of secrecy by Reid) is the hero of "Gwen," and

he and Gwen's author were once engaged to marry.  This is "fire-escape"

Simmons, the inveterate talker, you know: "Exit--in case of Simmons."



I had an engagement at a beautiful dwelling close to the Players for

10.30; I was there by 10.45.  Thirty cultivated and very musical ladies

and gentlemen present--all of them acquaintances and many of them

personal friends of mine.  That wonderful Hungarian Band was there (they

charge $500 for an evening.) Conversation and Band until midnight; then a

bite of supper; then the company was compactly grouped before me and I

told about Dr. B. E. Martin and the etchings, and followed it with the

Scotch-Irish Christening.  My, but the Martin is a darling story!  Next,

the head tenor from the Opera sang half a dozen great songs that set the

company wild, yes, mad with delight, that nobly handsome young Damrosch

accompanying on the piano.



Just a little pause--then the Band burst out into an explosion of weird

and tremendous dance music, a Hungarian celebrity and his wife took the

floor--I followed; I couldn't help it; the others drifted in, one by one,

and it was Onteora over again.



By half past 4 I had danced all those people down--and yet was not tired;

merely breathless.  I was in bed at 5, and asleep in ten minutes.  Up at

9 and presently at work on this letter to you.  I think I wrote until 2

or half past.  Then I walked leisurely out to Mr. Rogers's (it is called

3 miles but it is short of it) arriving at 3.30, but he was out

--to return at 5.30--(and a person was in, whom I don't particularly like)

--so I didn't stay, but dropped over and chatted with the Howellses until

6.



First, Howells and I had a chat together.  I asked about Mrs. H.  He said

she was fine, still steadily improving, and nearly back to her old best

health.  I asked (as if I didn't know):



"What do you attribute this strange miracle to?"



"Mind-cure--simply mind-cure."



"Lord, what a conversion!  You were a scoffer three months ago."



"I?  I wasn't."



"You were.  You made elaborate fun of me in this very room."



"I did not, Clemens."



"It's a lie, Howells, you did."



I detailed to him the conversation of that time--with the stately

argument furnished by Boyesen in the fact that a patient had actually

been killed by a mind-curist; and Howells's own smart remark that when

the mind-curist is done with you, you have to call in a "regular" at last

because the former can't procure you a burial permit.



At last he gave in--he said he remembered that talk, but had now been a

mind-curist so long it was difficult for him to realize that he had ever

been anything else.



Mrs. H. came skipping in, presently, the very person, to a dot, that she

used to be, so many years ago.



Mrs. H. said: "People may call it what they like, but it is just

hypnotism, and that's all it is--hypnotism pure and simple.  Mind-cure!

--the idea!  Why, this woman that cured me hasn't got any mind.  She's a

good creature, but she's dull and dumb and illiterate and--"



"Now Eleanor!"



"I know what I'm talking about!--don't I go there twice a week?  And Mr.

Clemens, if you could only see her wooden and satisfied face when she

snubs me for forgetting myself and showing by a thoughtless remark that

to me weather is still weather, instead of being just an abstraction and

a superstition--oh, it's the funniest thing you ever saw!  A-n-d-when she

tilts up her nose-well, it's--it's--Well it's that kind of a nose that--"



"Now Eleanor!--the woman is not responsible for her nose--" and so-on and

so-on.  It didn't seem to me that I had any right to be having this feast

and you not there.



She convinced me before she got through, that she and William James are

right--hypnotism and mind-cure are the same thing; no difference between

them.  Very well; the very source, the very center of hypnotism is Paris.

Dr. Charcot's pupils and disciples are right there and ready to your hand

without fetching poor dear old Susy across the stormy sea.  Let Mrs.

Mackay (to whom I send my best respects), tell you whom to go to to learn

all you need to learn and how to proceed.  Do, do it, honey.  Don't lose

a minute.



.....At 11 o'clock last night Mr. Rogers said:



"I am able to feel physical fatigue--and I feel it now.  You never show

any, either in your eyes or your movements; do you ever feel any?"



I was able to say that I had forgotten what that feeling was like.  Don't

you remember how almost impossible it was for me to tire myself at the

Villa?  Well, it is just so in New York.  I go to bed unfatigued at 3,

I get up fresh and fine six hours later.  I believe I have taken only one

daylight nap since I have been here.



When the anchor is down, then I shall say:



"Farewell--a long farewell--to business!  I will never touch it again!"



I will live in literature, I will wallow in it, revel in it, I will swim

in ink!  Joan of Arc--but all this is premature; the anchor is not down

yet.



To-morrow (Tuesday) I will add a P. S. if I've any to add; but, whether

or no, I must mail this to morrow, for the mail steamer goes next day.



5.30 p. m.  Great Scott, this is Tuesday!  I must rush this letter into

the mail instantly.



Tell that sassy Ben I've got her welcome letter, and I'll write her as

soon as I get a daylight chance.  I've most time at night, but I'd

druther write daytimes.

                                             SAML.





     The Reid and Simmons mentioned in the foregoing were Robert Reid and

     Edward Simmons, distinguished painter--the latter a brilliant,

     fluent, and industrious talker.  The title; "Fire-escape Simmons,"

     which Clemens gives him, originated when Oliver Herford, whose

     quaint wit has so long delighted New-Yorkers, one day pinned up by

     the back door of the Players the notice: "Exit in case of Simmons."

     Gwen, a popular novel of that day, was written by Blanche Willis

     Howard.



     "Jamie" Dodge, in the next letter, was the son of Mrs. Mary Mapes

     Dodge, editor of St. Nicholas.





                       To Clara Clemens, in Paris:



                                   MR. ROGERS'S OFFICE, Feb.  5, '94.

Dear Benny--I was intending to answer your letter to-day, but I am away

down town, and will simply whirl together a sentence or two for

good-fellowship.  I have bought photographs of Coquelin and Jane Hading

and will ask them to sign them.  I shall meet Coquelin tomorrow night,

and if Hading is not present I will send her picture to her by somebody.



I am to breakfast with Madame Nordica in a few days, and meantime I hope

to get a good picture of her to sign.  She was of the breakfast company

yesterday, but the picture of herself which she signed and gave me does

not do her majestic beauty justice.



I am too busy to attend to the photo-collecting right, because I have to

live up to the name which Jamie Dodge has given me--the "Belle of New

York"--and it just keeps me rushing.  Yesterday I had engagements to

breakfast at noon, dine at 3, and dine again at 7.  I got away from the

long breakfast at 2 p. m., went and excused myself from the 3 o'clock

dinner, then lunched with Mrs. Dodge in 58th street, returned to the

Players and dressed, dined out at 9, and was back at Mrs. Dodge's at

10 p. m. where we had magic-lantern views of a superb sort, and a lot of

yarns until an hour after midnight, and got to bed at 2 this morning

--a good deal of a gain on my recent hours.  But I don't get tired; I

sleep as sound as a dead person, and always wake up fresh and strong

--usually at exactly 9.



I was at breakfast lately where people of seven separate nationalities

sat and the seven languages were going all the time.  At my side sat

a charming gentleman who was a delightful and active talker, and

interesting.  He talked glibly to those folks in all those seven

languages and still had a language to spare!  I wanted to kill him, for

very envy.



               I greet you with love and kisses.

                                                  PAPA.





                        To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris:



                                                       Feb.--.

Livy dear, last night I played billiards with Mr. Rogers until 11, then

went to Robert Reid's studio and had a most delightful time until 4 this

morning.  No ladies were invited this time.  Among the people present

were--



Coquelin;

Richard Harding Davis;

Harrison, the great out-door painter;

Wm. H. Chase, the artist;

Bettini, inventor of the new phonograph.

Nikola Tesla, the world-wide illustrious electrician; see article about

him in Jan. or Feb. Century.

John Drew, actor;

James Barnes, a marvelous mimic; my, you should see him!

Smedley the artist;

Zorn the artist;

Zogbaum the artist;

Reinhart the artist;

Metcalf the artist;

Ancona, head tenor at the Opera;



Oh, a great lot of others.  Everybody there had done something and was in

his way famous.



Somebody welcomed Coquelin in a nice little French speech; John Drew did

the like for me in English, and then the fun began.  Coquelin did some

excellent French monologues--one of them an ungrammatical Englishman

telling a colorless historiette in French.  It nearly killed the fifteen

or twenty people who understood it.



I told a yarn, Ancona sang half a dozen songs, Barnes did his darling

imitations, Harding Davis sang the hanging of Danny Deever, which was of

course good, but he followed it with that most fascinating (for what

reason I don't know) of all Kipling's poems, "On the Road to Mandalay,"

sang it tenderly, and it searched me deeper and charmed me more than the

Deever.



Young Gerrit Smith played some ravishing dance music and we all danced

about an hour.  There couldn't be a pleasanter night than that one was.

Some of those people complained of fatigue but I don't seem to know what

the sense of fatigue is.



Coquelin talks quite good English now.  He said:



"I have a brother who has the fine mind--ah, a charming and delicate

fancy, and he knows your writings so well, and loves them--and that is

the same with me.  It will stir him so when I write and tell him I have

seen you!"



Wasn't that nice?  We talked a good deal together.  He is as winning as

his own face.  But he wouldn't sign that photograph for Clara.  "That?

No!  She shall have a better one.  I will send it to you."



He is much driven, and will forget it, but Reid has promised to get the

picture for me, and I will try and keep him reminded.



Oh, dear, my time is all used up and your letters are not answered.



Mama, dear, I don't go everywhere--I decline most things.  But there are

plenty that I can't well get out of.



I will remember what you say and not make my yarning too common.



I am so glad Susy has gone on that trip and that you are trying the

electric.  May you both prosper.  For you are mighty dear to me and in my

thoughts always.

                                   SAML.





     The affairs of the Webster Publishing Company were by this time

     getting into a very serious condition indeed.  The effects of the

     panic of the year before could not be overcome.  Creditors were

     pressing their claims and profits were negligible.  In the following

     letter we get a Mark Twain estimate of the great financier who so

     cheerfully was willing to undertake the solving of Mark Twain's

     financial problems.





                        To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris:



                              THE PLAYERS, Feb. 15, '94.  11.30 p. m.

Livy darling, Yesterday I talked all my various matters over with Mr.

Rogers and we decided that it would be safe for me to leave here the 7th

of March, in the New York.  So his private secretary, Miss Harrison,

wrote and ordered a berth for me and then I lost no time in cabling you

that I should reach Southampton March 14, and Paris the 15th.  Land, but

it made my pulses leap, to think I was going to see you again!.....

One thing at a time.  I never fully laid Webster's disastrous condition

before Mr. Rogers until to-night after billiards.  I did hate to burden

his good heart and over-worked head with it, but he took hold with

avidity and said it was no burden to work for his friends, but a

pleasure.  We discussed it from various standpoints, and found it a

sufficiently difficult problem to solve; but he thinks that after he has

slept upon it and thought it over he will know what to suggest.



You must not think I am ever rude with Mr. Rogers, I am not.  He is not

common clay, but fine--fine and delicate--and that sort do not call out

the coarsenesses that are in my sort.  I am never afraid of wounding him;

I do not need to watch myself in that matter.  The sight of him is peace.



He wants to go to Japan--it is his dream; wants to go with me--which

means, the two families--and hear no more about business for awhile, and

have a rest.  And he needs it.  But it is like all the dreams of all busy

men--fated to remain dreams.



You perceive that he is a pleasant text for me.  It is easy to write

about him.  When I arrived in September, lord how black the prospect was

--how desperate, how incurably desperate!  Webster and Co had to have a

small sum of money or go under at once.  I flew to Hartford--to my

friends--but they were not moved, not strongly interested, and I was

ashamed that I went.  It was from Mr. Rogers, a stranger, that I got the

money and was by it saved.  And then--while still a stranger--he set

himself the task of saving my financial life without putting upon me (in

his native delicacy) any sense that I was the recipient of a charity,

a benevolence--and he has accomplished that task; accomplished it at a

cost of three months of wearing and difficult labor.  He gave that time

to me--time which could not be bought by any man at a hundred thousand

dollars a month--no, nor for three times the money.



Well, in the midst of that great fight, that long and admirable fight,

George Warner came to me and said:



"There is a splendid chance open to you.  I know a man--a prominent man

--who has written a book that will go like wildfire; a book that arraigns

the Standard Oil fiends, and gives them unmitigated hell, individual by

individual.  It is the very book for you to publish; there is a fortune

in it, and I can put you in communication with the author."



I wanted to say:



"The only man I care for in the world; the only man I would give a damn

for; the only man who is lavishing his sweat and blood to save me and

mine from starvation and shame, is a Standard Oil fiend.  If you know me,

you know whether I want the book or not."



But I didn't say that.  I said I didn't want any book; I wanted to get

out of the publishing business and out of all business, and was here for

that purpose and would accomplish it if I could.



But there's enough.  I shall be asleep by 3, and I don't need much sleep,

because I am never drowsy or tired these days.  Dear, dear Susy my

strength reproaches me when I think of her and you, my darling.



                                        SAML.





     But even so able a man as Henry Rogers could not accomplish the

     impossible.  The affairs of the Webster Company were hopeless, the

     business was not worth saving.  By Mr. Rogers's advice an assignment

     was made April, 18, 1894.  After its early spectacular success less

     than ten years had brought the business to failure.  The publication

     of the Grant memoirs had been its only great achievement.



     Clemens would seem to have believed that the business would resume,

     and for a time Rogers appears to have comforted him in his hope, but

     we cannot believe that it long survived.  Young Hall, who had made

     such a struggle for its salvation, was eager to go on, but he must

     presently have seen the futility of any effort in that direction.



     Of course the failure of Mark Twain's firm made a great stir in the

     country, and it is easy to understand that loyal friends would rally

     in his behalf.





                        To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris:



                                                       April 22, '94.

Dear old darling, we all think the creditors are going to allow us to

resume business; and if they do we shall pull through and pay the debts.

I am prodigiously glad we made an assignment.  And also glad that we did

not make it sooner.  Earlier we should have made a poor showing; but now

we shall make a good one.



I meet flocks of people, and they all shake me cordially by the hand and

say "I was so sorry to hear of the assignment, but so glad you did it.

It was around, this long time, that the concern was tottering, and all

your friends were afraid you would delay the assignment too long."



John Mackay called yesterday, and said, "Don't let it disturb you, Sam

--we all have to do it, at one time or another; it's nothing to be

ashamed of."



One stranger out in New York State sent me a dollar bill and thought

he would like to get up a dollar-subscription for me.  And Poultney

Bigelow's note came promptly, with his check for $1,000.  I had been

meeting him every day at the Club and liking him better and better all

the time.  I couldn't take his money, of course, but I thanked him

cordially for his good will.



Now and then a good and dear Joe Twichell or Susy Warner condoles with me

and says "Cheer up--don't be downhearted," and some other friend says,

"I am glad and surprised to see how cheerful you are and how bravely you

stand it"--and none of them suspect what a burden has been lifted from me

and how blithe I am inside.  Except when I think of you, dear heart--then

I am not blithe; for I seem to see you grieving and ashamed, and dreading

to look people in the face.  For in the thick of the fight there is

cheer, but you are far away and cannot hear the drums nor see the

wheeling squadrons.  You only seem to see rout, retreat, and dishonored

colors dragging in the dirt--whereas none of these things exist.  There

is temporary defeat, but no dishonor--and we will march again.  Charley

Warner said to-day, "Sho, Livy isn't worrying.  So long as she's got you

and the children she doesn't care what happens.  She knows it isn't her

affair."  Which didn't convince me.



Good bye my darling, I love you and all of the kids--and you can tell

Clara I am not a spitting gray kitten.

                                             SAML.





     Clemens sailed for Europe as soon as his affairs would permit him

     to go.  He must get settled where he could work comfortably.

     Type-setter prospects seemed promising, but meantime there was

     need of funds.



     He began writing on the ship, as was his habit, and had completed

     his article on Fenimore Cooper by the time he reached London.  In

     August we find him writing to Mr. Rogers from Etretat, a little

     Norman watering-place.





                      To H. H. Rogers, in New York:



                                             ETRETAT, (NORMANDIE)

                                                  CHALET DES ABRIS

                                                       Aug.  25, '94.

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--I find the Madam ever so much better in health and

strength.  The air is superb and soothing and wholesome, and the Chalet

is remote from noise and people, and just the place to write in.  I shall

begin work this afternoon.



Mrs. Clemens is in great spirits on, account of the benefit which she has

received from the electrical treatment in Paris and is bound to take it

up again and continue it all the winter, and of course I am perfectly

willing.  She requires me to drop the lecture platform out of my mind and

go straight ahead with Joan until the book is finished.  If I should have

to go home for even a week she means to go with me--won't consent to be

separated again--but she hopes I won't need to go.



I tell her all right, "I won't go unless you send, and then I must."



She keeps the accounts; and as she ciphers it we can't get crowded for

money for eight months yet.  I didn't know that.  But I don't know much

anyway.

                    Sincerely yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     The reader may remember that Clemens had written the first half of

     his Joan of Arc book at the Villa Viviani, in Florence, nearly two

     years before.  He had closed the manuscript then with the taking of

     Orleans, and was by no means sure that he would continue the story

     beyond that point.  Now, however, he was determined to reach the

     tale's tragic conclusion.





                      To H. H. Rogers, in New York:



                                                       ETRETAT,

                                                  Sunday, Sept. 9, '94.

DEAR MR. ROGERS, I drove the quill too hard, and I broke down--in my

head.  It has now been three days since I laid up.  When I wrote you a

week ago I had added 10,000 words or thereabout to Joan.  Next day I

added 1,500 which was a proper enough day's work though not a full one;

but during Tuesday and Wednesday I stacked up an aggregate of 6,000

words--and that was a very large mistake.  My head hasn't been worth a

cent since.



However, there's a compensation; for in those two days I reached and

passed--successfully--a point which I was solicitous about before I ever

began the book: viz., the battle of Patay.  Because that would naturally

be the next to the last chapter of a work consisting of either two books

or one.  In the one case one goes right along from that point (as I shall

do now); in the other he would add a wind-up chapter and make the book

consist of Joan's childhood and military career alone.



I shall resume work to-day; and hereafter I will not go at such an

intemperate' rate.  My head is pretty cobwebby yet.



I am hoping that along about this time I shall hear that the machine is

beginning its test in the Herald office.  I shall be very glad indeed to

know the result of it.  I wish I could be there.

                    Sincerely yours

                              S. L. CLEMENS.





     Rouen, where Joan met her martyrdom, was only a short distance away,

     and they halted there en route to Paris, where they had arranged to

     spend the winter.  The health of Susy Clemens was not good, and they

     lingered in Rouen while Clemens explored the old city and

     incidentally did some writing of another sort.  In a note to Mr.

     Rogers he said: "To put in my odd time I am writing some articles

     about Paul Bourget and his Outre-Mer chapters--laughing at them and

     at some of our oracular owls who find them important.  What the hell

     makes them important, I should like to know!"



     He was still at Rouen two weeks later and had received encouraging

     news from Rogers concerning the type-setter, which had been placed

     for trial in the office of the Chicago Herald.  Clemens wrote: "I

     can hardly keep from sending a hurrah by cable.  I would certainly

     do it if I wasn't superstitious."  His restraint, though wise, was

     wasted the end was near.





                      To H. H. Rogers, in New York:



                                        169 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE,

                                             PARIS, Dec. 22; '94.

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--I seemed to be entirely expecting your letter, and also

prepared and resigned; but Lord, it shows how little we know ourselves

and how easily we can deceive ourselves.  It hit me like a thunder-clap.

It knocked every rag of sense out of my head, and I went flying here and

there and yonder, not knowing what I was doing, and only one clearly

defined thought standing up visible and substantial out of the crazy

storm-drift that my dream of ten years was in desperate peril, and out of

the 60,000 or 90,000 projects for its rescue that came floating through

my skull, not one would hold still long enough for me to examine it and

size it up.  Have you ever been like that?  Not so much so, I reckon.



There was another clearly defined idea--I must be there and see it die.

That is, if it must die; and maybe if I were there we might hatch up some

next-to-impossible way to make it take up its bed and take a walk.



So, at the end of four hours I started, still whirling and walked over to

the rue Scribe--4 P. M.--and asked a question or two and was told I

should be running a big risk if I took the 9 P. M.  train for London and

Southampton; "better come right along at 6.52 per Havre special and step

aboard the New York all easy and comfortable."  Very! and I about two

miles from home, with no packing done.



Then it occurred to me that none of these salvation-notions that were

whirl-winding through my head could be examined or made available unless

at least a month's time could be secured.  So I cabled you, and said to

myself that I would take the French steamer tomorrow (which will be

Sunday).



By bedtime Mrs. Clemens had reasoned me into a fairly rational and

contented state of mind; but of course it didn't last long.  So I went on

thinking--mixing it with a smoke in the dressing room once an hour--until

dawn this morning.  Result--a sane resolution; no matter what your answer

to my cable might be, I would hold still and not sail until I should get

an answer to this present letter which I am now writing, or a cable

answer from you saying "Come" or "Remain."



I have slept 6 hours, my pond has clarified, and I find the sediment of

my 70,000 projects to be of this character:



[Several pages of suggestions for reconstructing the machine follow.]



Don't say I'm wild.  For really I'm sane again this morning.



                          ......................



I am going right along with Joan, now, and wait untroubled till I hear

from you.  If you think I can be of the least use, cable me "Come."

I can write Joan on board ship and lose no time.  Also I could discuss my

plan with the publisher for a deluxe Joan, time being an object, for some

of the pictures could be made over here cheaply and quickly, but would

cost much time and money in America.



                          ......................



If the meeting should decide to quit business Jan. 4, I'd like to have

Stoker stopped from paying in any more money, if Miss Harrison doesn't

mind that disagreeable job.  And I'll have to write them, too, of course.

                    With love,

                         S. L. CLEMENS.





     The "Stoker" of this letter was Bram Stoker, long associated with

     Sir Henry Irving.  Irving himself had also taken stock in the

     machine.  The address, 169 Rue de l'Universite, whence these letters

     are written, was the beautiful studio home of the artist Pomroy

     which they had taken for the winter.





                     To H.  H.  Rogers, in New York:



                                        169 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE,

                                        PARIS, Dec. 27, '94.

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--Notwithstanding your heart is "old and hard," you make

a body choke up.  I know you "mean every word you say" and I do take it

"in the same spirit in which you tender it."  I shall keep your regard

while we two live--that I know; for I shall always remember what you have

done for me, and that will insure me against ever doing anything that

could forfeit it or impair it.  I am 59 years old; yet I never had a

friend before who put out a hand and tried to pull me ashore when he

found me in deep waters.



It is six days or seven days ago that I lived through that despairing

day, and then through a night without sleep; then settled down next day

into my right mind (or thereabouts,) and wrote you.  I put in the rest of

that day till 7 P. M.  plenty comfortably enough writing a long chapter

of my book; then went to a masked ball blacked up as Uncle Remus, taking

Clara along; and we had a good time.  I have lost no day since and

suffered no discomfort to speak of, but drove my troubles out of my mind

and had good success in keeping them out--through watchfulness.  I have

done a good week's work and put the book a good way ahead in the Great

Trial, which is the difficult part which requires the most thought and

carefulness.  I cannot see the end of the Trial yet, but I am on the

road.  I am creeping surely toward it.



"Why not leave them all to me."  My business bothers?  I take you by the

hand!  I jump at the chance!



I ought to be ashamed and I am trying my best to be ashamed--and yet I do

jump at the chance in spite of it.  I don't want to write Irving and I

don't want to write Stoker.  It doesn't seem as if I could.  But I can

suggest something for you to write them; and then if you see that I am

unwise, you can write them something quite different.  Now this is my

idea:



     1.  To return Stoker's $100 to him and keep his stock.



     2.  And tell Irving that when luck turns with me I will make good to

     him what the salvage from the dead Co. fails to pay him of his $500.





P. S.  Madam says No, I must face the music.  So I enclose my effort to

be used if you approve, but not otherwise.



There!  Now if you will alter it to suit your judgment and bang away, I

shall be eternally obliged.



We shall try to find a tenant for our Hartford house; not an easy matter,

for it costs heavily to live in.  We can never live in it again; though

it would break the family's hearts if they could believe it.



Nothing daunts Mrs. Clemens or makes the world look black to her--which

is the reason I haven't drowned myself.



We all send our deepest and warmest greetings to you and all of yours and

a Happy New Year!

                              S. L. CLEMENS.





Enclosure:



MY DEAR STOKER,--I am not dating this because it is not to be mailed at

present.



When it reaches you it will mean that there is a hitch in my

machine-enterprise--a hitch so serious as to make it take to itself the

aspect of a dissolved dream.  This letter, then, will contain cheque for

the $100 which you have paid.  And will you tell Irving for me--I can't

get up courage enough to talk about this misfortune myself, except to

you, whom by good luck I haven't damaged yet that when the wreckage

presently floats ashore he will get a good deal of his $500 back; and a

dab at a time I will make up to him the rest.



I'm not feeling as fine as I was when I saw you there in your home.

Please remember me kindly to Mrs. Stoker.  I gave up that London

lecture-project entirely.  Had to--there's never been a chance since

to find the time.

                    Sincerely yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.









XXXV



LETTERS, 1895-96, TO H. H. ROGERS AND OTHERS.  FINISHING "JOAN OF ARC."

THE TRIP AROUND THE WORLD.  DEATH OF SUSY CLEMENS





                   To H.  H.  Rogers, in New York City:



                                                       [No date.]

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--Yours of Dec. 21 has arrived, containing the circular

to stockholders and I guess the Co. will really quit--there doesn't seem

to be any other wise course.



There's one thing which makes it difficult for me to soberly realize that

my ten year dream is actually dissolved; and that is, that it reveries my

horoscope.  The proverb says, "Born lucky, always lucky," and I am very

superstitious.  As a small boy I was notoriously lucky.  It was usual for

one or two of our lads (per annum) to get drowned in the Mississippi or

in Bear Creek, but I was pulled out in a 2/3 drowned condition 9 times

before I learned to swim, and was considered to be a cat in disguise.

When the "Pennsylvania" blew up and the telegraph reported my brother as

fatally injured (with 60 others) but made no mention of me, my uncle said

to my mother "It means that Sam was somewhere else, after being on that

boat a year and a half--he was born lucky."  Yes, I was somewhere else.

I am so superstitious that I have always been afraid to have business

dealings with certain relatives and friends of mine because they were

unlucky people.  All my life I have stumbled upon lucky chances of large

size, and whenever they were wasted it was because of my own stupidity

and carelessness.  And so I have felt entirely certain that that machine

would turn up trumps eventually.  It disappointed me lots of times, but I

couldn't shake off the confidence of a life-time in my luck.



Well, whatever I get out of the wreckage will be due to good luck--the

good luck of getting you into the scheme--for, but for that, there

wouldn't be any wreckage; it would be total loss.



I wish you had been in at the beginning.  Then we should have had the

good luck to step promptly ashore.



Miss Harrison has had a dream which promises me a large bank account,

and I want her to go ahead and dream it twice more, so as to make the

prediction sure to be fulfilled.



I've got a first rate subject for a book.  It kept me awake all night,

and I began it and completed it in my mind.  The minute I finish Joan

I will take it up.

               Love and Happy New Year to you all.

                         Sincerely yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     This was about the end of the machine interests so far as Clemens

     was concerned.  Paige succeeded in getting some new people

     interested, but nothing important happened, or that in any way

     affected Mark Twain.  Characteristically he put the whole matter

     behind him and plunged into his work, facing comparative poverty and

     a burden of debts with a stout heart.  The beginning of the new year

     found him really poorer in purse than he had ever been in his life,

     but certainly not crushed, or even discouraged--at least, not

     permanently--and never more industrious or capable.





                   To H.  H.  Rogers, in New York City:



                                        169 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE,

                                             PARIS, Jan. 23, '95.

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--After I wrote you, two or three days ago I thought I

would make a holiday of the rest of the day--the second deliberate

holiday since I had the gout.  On the first holiday I wrote a tale of

about 6,000 words, which was 3 days' work in one; and this time I did

8,000 before midnight.  I got nothing out of that first holiday but the

recreation of it, for I condemned the work after careful reading and some

revision; but this time I fared better--I finished the Huck Finn tale

that lies in your safe, and am satisfied with it.



The Bacheller syndicate (117 Tribune Building) want a story of 5,000

words (lowest limit of their London agent) for $1,000 and offer to plank

the check on delivery, and it was partly to meet that demand that I took

that other holiday.  So as I have no short story that suits me (and can't

and shan't make promises), the best I can do is to offer the longer one

which I finished on my second holiday--"Tom Sawyer, Detective."



It makes 27 or 28,000 words, and is really written for grown folks,

though I expect young folk to read it, too.  It transfers to the banks of

the Mississippi the incidents of a strange murder which was committed in

Sweden in old times.



I'll refer applicants for a sight of the story to you or Miss Harrison.

--[Secretary to Mr. Rogers.]

                         Yours sincerely,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





                   To H.  H.  Rogers, in New York City:



                                        169 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE,

                                             Apr. 29, '95.

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--Your felicitous delightful letter of the 15th arrived

three days ago, and brought great pleasure into the house.



There is one thing that weighs heavily on Mrs. Clemens and me.  That is

Brusnahan's money.  If he is satisfied to have it invested in the Chicago

enterprise, well and good; if not, we would like to have the money paid

back to him.  I will give him as many months to decide in as he pleases

--let him name 6 or 10 or 12--and we will let the money stay where it is

in your hands till the time is up.  Will Miss Harrison tell him so?  I

mean if you approve.  I would like him to have a good investment, but

would meantime prefer to protect him against loss.



At 6 minutes past 7, yesterday evening, Joan of Arc was burned at the

stake.



With the long strain gone, I am in a sort of physical collapse today, but

it will be gone tomorrow.  I judged that this end of the book would be

hard work, and it turned out so.  I have never done any work before that

cost so much thinking and weighing and measuring and planning and

cramming, or so much cautious and painstaking execution.  For I wanted

the whole Rouen trial in, if it could be got in in such a way that the

reader's interest would not flag--in fact I wanted the reader's interest

to increase; and so I stuck to it with that determination in view--with

the result that I have left nothing out but unimportant repetitions.

Although it is mere history--history pure and simple--history stripped

naked of flowers, embroideries, colorings, exaggerations, invention--the

family agree that I have succeeded.  It was a perilous thing to try in a

tale, but I never believed it a doubtful one--provided I stuck strictly

to business and didn't weaken and give up: or didn't get lazy and skimp

the work.  The first two-thirds of the book were easy; for I only needed

to keep my historical road straight; therefore I used for reference only

one French history and one English one--and shoveled in as much fancy

work and invention on both sides of the historical road as I pleased.

But on this last third I have constantly used five French sources and

five English ones and I think no telling historical nugget in any of them

has escaped me.



Possibly the book may not sell, but that is nothing--it was written for

love.



There--I'm called to see company.  The family seldom require this of me,

but they know I am not working today.

                         Yours sincerely,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     "Brusnahan," of the foregoing letter, was an employee of the New

     York Herald, superintendent of the press-room--who had invested some

     of his savings in the type-setter.



     In February Clemens returned to New York to look after matters

     connected with his failure and to close arrangements for a

     reading-tour around the world.  He was nearly sixty years old, and

     time had not lessened his loathing for the platform.  More than

     once, however, in earlier years, he had turned to it as a

     debt-payer, and never yet had his burden been so great as now.  He

     concluded arrangements with Major Pond to take him as far as the

     Pacific Coast, and with R. S. Smythe, of Australia, for the rest of

     the tour.  In April we find him once more back in Paris preparing

     to bring the family to America, He had returned by way of London,

     where he had visited Stanley the explorer--an old friend.





                    To H. H. Rogers, in New York City:



                                             169 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE,

                                                  Sunday, Apr.7,'95.

DEAR MR.  ROGERS,--..... Stanley is magnificently housed in London, in a

grand mansion in the midst of the official world, right off Downing

Street and Whitehall.  He had an extraordinary assemblage of brains and

fame there to meet me--thirty or forty (both sexes) at dinner, and more

than a hundred came in, after dinner.  Kept it up till after midnight.

There were cabinet ministers, ambassadors, admirals, generals, canons,

Oxford professors, novelists, playwrights, poets, and a number of people

equipped with rank and brains.  I told some yarns and made some speeches.

I promised to call on all those people next time I come to London, and

show them the wife and the daughters.  If I were younger and very strong

I would dearly love to spend a season in London--provided I had no work

on hand, or no work more exacting than lecturing.  I think I will lecture

there a month or two when I return from Australia.



There were many delightful ladies in that company.  One was the wife of

His Excellency Admiral Bridge, Commander-in Chief of the Australian

Station, and she said her husband was able to throw wide all doors to me

in that part of the world and would be glad to do it, and would yacht me

and my party around, and excursion us in his flag-ship and make us have a

great time; and she said she would write him we were coming, and we would

find him ready.  I have a letter from her this morning enclosing a letter

of introduction to the Admiral.  I already know the Admiral commanding in

the China Seas and have promised to look in on him out there.  He sleeps

with my books under his pillow.  P'raps it is the only way he can sleep.



According to Mrs. Clemens's present plans--subject to modification, of

course--we sail in May; stay one day, or two days in New York, spend

June, July and August in Elmira and prepare my lectures; then lecture in

San Francisco and thereabouts during September and sail for Australia

before the middle of October and open the show there about the middle of

November.  We don't take the girls along; it would be too expensive and

they are quite willing to remain behind anyway.



Mrs. C. is feeling so well that she is not going to try the New York

doctor till we have gone around the world and robbed it and made the

finances a little easier.

                    With a power of love to you all,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     There would come moments of depression, of course, and a week later

     he wrote: "I am tired to death all the time:"  To a man of less

     vitality, less vigor of mind and body, it is easy to believe that

     under such circumstances this condition would have remained

     permanent.  But perhaps, after all, it was his comic outlook on

     things in general that was his chief life-saver.





                    To H. H. Rogers, in New York City:



                              169 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE, Apr. 29, '95.

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--I have been hidden an hour or two, reading proof of

Joan and now I think I am a lost child.  I can't find anybody on the

place.  The baggage has all disappeared, including the family.  I reckon

that in the hurry and bustle of moving to the hotel they forgot me.  But

it is no matter.  It is peacefuller now than I have known it for days and

days and days.



In these Joan proofs which I have been reading for the September Harper

I find a couple of tip-top platform readings--and I mean to read them on

our trip.  If the authorship is known by then; and if it isn't, I will

reveal it.  The fact is, there is more good platform-stuff in Joan than

in any previous book of mine, by a long sight.



Yes, every danged member of the tribe has gone to the hotel and left me

lost.  I wonder how they can be so careless with property.  I have got to

try to get there by myself now.



All the trunks are going over as luggage; then I've got to find somebody

on the dock who will agree to ship 6 of them to the Hartford Customhouse.

If it is difficult I will dump them into the river.  It is very careless

of Mrs. Clemens to trust trunks and things to me.

                         Sincerely yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     By the latter part of May they were at Quarry Farm, and Clemens,

     laid up there with a carbuncle, was preparing for his long tour.

     The outlook was not a pleasant one.  To Mr. Rogers he wrote: "I

     sha'n't be able to stand on the platform before we start west.  I

     sha'n't get a single chance to practice my reading; but will have to

     appear in Cleveland without the essential preparation.  Nothing in

     this world can save it from being a shabby, poor disgusting

     performance.  I've got to stand; I can't do it and talk to a house,

     and how in the nation am I going to sit?  Land of Goshen, it's this

     night week!  Pray for me."



     The opening at Cleveland July 15th appears not to have been much of

     a success, though from another reason, one that doubtless seemed

     amusing to him later.





                    To H. H. Rogers, in New York City:



                                                       (Forenoon)

                                             CLEVELAND, July 16, '95.

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--Had a roaring success at the Elmira reformatory Sunday

night.  But here, last night, I suffered defeat--There were a couple of

hundred little boys behind me on the stage, on a lofty tier of benches

which made them the most conspicuous objects in the house.  And there was

nobody to watch them or keep them quiet.  Why, with their scufflings and

horse-play and noise, it was just a menagerie.  Besides, a concert of

amateurs had been smuggled into the program (to precede me,) and their

families and friends (say ten per cent of the audience) kept encoring

them and they always responded.  So it was 20 minutes to 9 before I got

the platform in front of those 2,600 people who had paid a dollar apiece

for a chance to go to hell in this fashion.



I got started magnificently, but inside of half an hour the scuffling

boys had the audience's maddened attention and I saw it was a gone case;

so I skipped a third of my program and quit.  The newspapers are kind,

but between you and me it was a defeat.  There ain't going to be any more

concerts at my lectures.  I care nothing for this defeat, because it was

not my fault.  My first half hour showed that I had the house, and I

could have kept it if I hadn't been so handicapped.

                         Yours sincerely,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.



P. S.  Had a satisfactory time at Petoskey.  Crammed the house and turned

away a crowd.  We had $548 in the house, which was $300 more than it had

ever had in it before.  I believe I don't care to have a talk go off

better than that one did.





     Mark Twain, on this long tour, was accompanied by his wife and his

     daughter Clara--Susy and Jean Clemens remaining with their aunt at

     Quarry Farm.  The tour was a financial success from the start.

     By the time they were ready to sail from Vancouver five thousand

     dollars had been remitted to Mr. Rogers against that day of

     settlement when the debts of Webster & Co. were to be paid.  Perhaps

     it should be stated here that a legal settlement had been arranged

     on a basis of fifty cents on the dollar, but neither Clemens nor his

     wife consented to this as final.  They would pay in full.



     They sailed from Vancouver August 23, 1895.  About the only letter

     of this time is an amusing note to Rudyard Kipling, written at the

     moment of departure.





                     To Rudyard Kipling, in England:



                                                       August, 1895.

DEAR KIPLING,--It is reported that you are about to visit India.  This

has moved me to journey to that far country in order that I may unload

from my conscience a debt long due to you.  Years ago you came from India

to Elmira to visit me, as you said at the time.  It has always been my

purpose to return that visit and that great compliment some day.  I shall

arrive next January and you must be ready.  I shall come riding my ayah

with his tusks adorned with silver bells and ribbons and escorted by a

troop of native howdahs richly clad and mounted upon a herd of wild

bungalows; and you must be on hand with a few bottles of ghee, for I

shall be thirsty.

                         Affectionately,

                              S. L. CLEMENS.





     Clemens, platforming in Australia, was too busy to write letters.

     Everywhere he was welcomed by great audiences, and everywhere

     lavishly entertained.  He was beset by other carbuncles, but would

     seem not to have been seriously delayed by them.  A letter to his

     old friend Twichell carries the story.





                  To Rev. Jos. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                   FRANK MOELLER'S MASONIC HOTEL,

                                             NAPIER, NEW ZEALAND,

                                                  November 29, '95.

DEAR JOE,--Your welcome letter of two months and five days ago has just

arrived, and finds me in bed with another carbuncle.  It is No. 3.  Not a

serious one this time.  I lectured last night without inconvenience, but

the doctors thought best to forbid to-night's lecture.  My second one

kept me in bed a week in Melbourne.



.....We are all glad it is you who is to write the article, it delights

us all through.



I think it was a good stroke of luck that knocked me on my back here at

Napier, instead of some hotel in the centre of a noisy city.  Here we

have the smooth and placidly-complaining sea at our door, with nothing

between us and it but 20 yards of shingle--and hardly a suggestion of

life in that space to mar it or make a noise.  Away down here fifty-five

degrees south of the Equator this sea seems to murmur in an unfamiliar

tongue--a foreign tongue--tongue bred among the ice-fields of the

Antarctic--a murmur with a note of melancholy in it proper to the vast

unvisited solitudes it has come from.  It was very delicious and solacing

to wake in the night and find it still pulsing there.  I wish you were

here--land, but it would be fine!



Livy and Clara enjoy this nomadic life pretty well; certainly better than

one could have expected they would.  They have tough experiences, in the

way of food and beds and frantic little ships, but they put up with the

worst that befalls with heroic endurance that resembles contentment.



No doubt I shall be on the platform next Monday.  A week later we shall

reach Wellington; talk there 3 nights, then sail back to Australia.  We

sailed for New Zealand October 30.



Day before yesterday was Livy's birthday (under world time), and tomorrow

will be mine.  I shall be 60--no thanks for it.



I and the others send worlds and worlds of love to all you dear ones.



                                   MARK.





     The article mentioned in the foregoing letter was one which Twichell

     had been engaged by Harper's Magazine to write concerning the home

     life and characteristics of Mark Twain.  By the time the Clemens

     party had completed their tour of India--a splendid, triumphant

     tour, too full of work and recreation for letter-writing--and had

     reached South Africa, the article had appeared, a satisfactory one,

     if we may judge by Mark Twain's next.



     This letter, however, has a special interest in the account it gives

     of Mark Twain's visit to the Jameson raiders, then imprisoned at

     Pretoria.





                  To Rev. Jos. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                   PRETORIA, SOUTH AFRICAN REPUBLIC,

                                        The Queen's Birthday, '96.

                                                       (May 24)

DEAR OLD JOE,--Harper for May was given to me yesterday in Johannesburg

by an American lady who lives there, and I read your article on me while

coming up in the train with her and an old friend and fellow-Missourian

of mine, Mrs. John Hays Hammond, the handsome and spirited wife of the

chief of the 4 Reformers, who lies in prison here under a 15-year

sentence, along with 50 minor Reformers who are in for 1 and 5-year

terms.  Thank you a thousand times Joe, you have praised me away above my

deserts, but I am not the man to quarrel with you for that; and as for

Livy, she will take your very hardiest statements at par, and be grateful

to you to the bottom of her heart.  Between you and Punch and Brander

Matthews, I am like to have my opinion of myself raised sufficiently

high; and I guess the children will be after you, for it is the study of

their lives to keep my self-appreciation down somewhere within bounds.



I had a note from Mrs. Rev. Gray (nee Tyler) yesterday, and called on her

to-day.  She is well.



Yesterday I was allowed to enter the prison with Mrs. Hammond.  A Boer

guard was at my elbow all the time, but was courteous and polite, only

he barred the way in the compound (quadrangle or big open court) and

wouldn't let me cross a white mark that was on the ground--the

"death-line" one of the prisoners called it.  Not in earnest, though, I

think. I found that I had met Hammond once when he was a Yale senior and

a guest of Gen. Franklin's.  I also found that I had known Capt. Mein

intimately 32 years ago.  One of the English prisoners had heard me

lecture in London 23 years ago.  After being introduced in turn to all

the prisoners, I was allowed to see some of the cells and examine their

food, beds, etc.  I was told in Johannesburg that Hammond's salary of

$150,000 a year is not stopped, and that the salaries of some of the

others are still continued.  Hammond was looking very well indeed, and I

can say the same of all the others.  When the trouble first fell upon

them it hit some of them very hard; several fell sick (Hammond among

them), two or three had to be removed to the hospital, and one of the

favorites lost his mind and killed himself, poor fellow, last week.  His

funeral, with a sorrowing following of 10,000, took the place of the

public demonstration the Americans were getting up for me.



These prisoners are strong men, prominent men, and I believe they are all

educated men.  They are well off; some of them are wealthy.  They have a

lot of books to read, they play games and smoke, and for awhile they will

be able to bear up in their captivity; but not for long, not for very

long, I take it.  I am told they have times of deadly brooding and

depression.  I made them a speech--sitting down.  It just happened so.

I don't prefer that attitude.  Still, it has one advantage--it is only a

talk, it doesn't take the form of a speech.  I have tried it once before

on this trip.  However, if a body wants to make sure of having "liberty,"

and feeling at home, he had better stand up, of course.  I advised them

at considerable length to stay where they were--they would get used to it

and like it presently; if they got out they would only get in again

somewhere else, by the look of their countenances; and I promised to go

and see the President and do what I could to get him to double their

jail-terms.



We had a very good sociable time till the permitted time was up and a

little over, and we outsiders had to go.  I went again to-day, but the

Rev. Mr. Gray had just arrived, and the warden, a genial, elderly Boer

named Du Plessis--explained that his orders wouldn't allow him to admit

saint and sinner at the same time, particularly on a Sunday.  Du Plessis

--descended from the Huguenot fugitives, you see, of 200 years ago

--but he hasn't any French left in him now--all Dutch.



It gravels me to think what a goose I was to make Livy and Clara remain

in Durban; but I wanted to save them the 30-hour railway trip to

Johannesburg.  And Durban and its climate and opulent foliage were so

lovely, and the friends there were so choice and so hearty that I

sacrificed myself in their interests, as I thought.  It is just the

beginning of winter, and although the days are hot, the nights are cool.

But it's lovely weather in these regions, too; and the friends are as

lovely as the weather, and Johannesburg and Pretoria are brimming with

interest.  I talk here twice more, then return to Johannesburg next

Wednesday for a fifth talk there; then to the Orange Free State capital,

then to some town on the way to Port Elizabeth, where the two will join

us by sea from Durban; then the gang will go to Kimberley and presently

to the Cape--and so, in the course of time, we shall get through and sail

for England; and then we will hunt up a quiet village and I will write

and Livy edit, for a few months, while Clara and Susy and Jean study

music and things in London.



We have had noble good times everywhere and every day, from Cleveland,

July 15, to Pretoria, May 24, and never a dull day either on sea or land,

notwithstanding the carbuncles and things.  Even when I was laid up 10

days at Jeypore in India we had the charmingest times with English

friends.  All over India the English well, you will never know how good

and fine they are till you see them.



Midnight and after! and I must do many things to-day, and lecture

tonight.



A world of thanks to you, Joe dear, and a world of love to all of you.



                                             MARK.





     Perhaps for readers of a later day a word as to what constituted the

     Jameson raid would not be out of place here.  Dr. Leander Starr

     Jameson was an English physician, located at Kimberley.  President

     Kruger (Oom Paul), head of the South African Republic, was one of

     his patients; also, Lobengula, the Matabele chief.  From Lobengula

     concessions were obtained which led to the formation of the South

     African Company.  Jameson gave up his profession and went in for

     conquest, associating himself with the projects of Cecil Rhodes.

     In time he became administrator of Rhodesia.  By the end of 1894.

     he was in high feather, and during a visit to England was feted as

     a sort of romantic conqueror of the olden time.  Perhaps this turned

     his head; at all events at the end of 1895 came the startling news

     that "Dr. Jim," as he was called, at the head of six hundred men,

     had ridden into the Transvaal in support of a Rhodes scheme for an

     uprising at Johannesburg.  The raid was a failure.  Jameson, and

     those other knights of adventure, were captured by the forces of

     "Oom Paul," and some of them barely escaped execution.  The Boer

     president handed them over to the English Government for punishment,

     and they received varying sentences, but all were eventually

     released.  Jameson, later, became again prominent in South-African

     politics, but there is no record of any further raids.



                        .........................



     The Clemens party sailed from South Africa the middle of July, 1896,

     and on the last day of the month reached England.  They had not

     planned to return to America, but to spend the winter in or near

     London in some quiet place where Clemens could write the book of his

     travels.



     The two daughters in America, Susy and Jean, were expected to arrive

     August 12th, but on that day there came, instead, a letter saying

     that Susy Clemens was not well enough to sail.  A cable inquiry was

     immediately sent, but the reply when it came was not satisfactory,

     and Mrs. Clemens and Clara sailed for America without further delay.

     This was on August 15th.  Three days later, in the old home at

     Hartford, Susy Clemens died of cerebral fever.  She had been

     visiting Mrs. Charles Dudley Warner, but by the physician's advice

     had been removed to the comfort and quiet of her own home, only a

     few steps away.



     Mark Twain, returning from his triumphant tour of the world in the

     hope that soon, now, he might be free from debt, with his family

     happily gathered about him, had to face alone this cruel blow.

     There was no purpose in his going to America; Susy would be buried

     long before his arrival.  He awaited in England the return of his

     broken family.  They lived that winter in a quiet corner of Chelsea,

     No. 23 Tedworth Square.





             To Rev. Joseph H.  Twichell, in Hartford, Conn.:



                                        Permanent address:

                                        % CHATTO & WINDUS

                                        111 T.  MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON,

                                                       Sept.  27, '96.

Through Livy and Katy I have learned, dear old Joe, how loyally you stood

poor Susy's friend, and mine, and Livy's: how you came all the way down,

twice, from your summer refuge on your merciful errands to bring the

peace and comfort of your beloved presence, first to that poor child, and

again to the broken heart of her poor desolate mother.  It was like you;

like your good great heart, like your matchless and unmatchable self.

It was no surprise to me to learn that you stayed by Susy long hours,

careless of fatigue and heat, it was no surprise to me to learn that you

could still the storms that swept her spirit when no other could; for she

loved you, revered you, trusted you, and "Uncle Joe" was no empty phrase

upon her lips!  I am grateful to you, Joe, grateful to the bottom of my

heart, which has always been filled with love for you, and respect and

admiration; and I would have chosen you out of all the world to take my

place at Susy's side and Livy's in those black hours.



Susy was a rare creature; the rarest that has been reared in Hartford in

this generation.  And Livy knew it, and you knew it, and Charley Warner

and George, and Harmony, and the Hillyers and the Dunhams and the

Cheneys, and Susy and Lilly, and the Bunces, and Henry Robinson and Dick

Burton, and perhaps others.  And I also was of the number, but not in the

same degree--for she was above my duller comprehension.  I merely knew

that she was my superior in fineness of mind, in the delicacy and

subtlety of her intellect, but to fully measure her I was not competent.

I know her better now; for I have read her private writings and sounded

the deeps of her mind; and I know better, now, the treasure that was mine

than I knew it when I had it.  But I have this consolation: that dull as

I was, I always knew enough to be proud when she commended me or my work

--as proud as if Livy had done it herself--and I took it as the accolade

from the hand of genius.  I see now--as Livy always saw--that she had

greatness in her; and that she herself was dimly conscious of it.



And now she is dead--and I can never tell her.



God bless you Joe--and all of your house.

                                             S. L. C.





               To Mr. Henry C.  Robinson, Hartford, Conn.:



                                             LONDON, Sept.  28, '96.

It is as you say, dear old friend, "the pathos of it" yes, it was a

piteous thing--as piteous a tragedy as any the year can furnish.  When we

started westward upon our long trip at half past ten at night, July 14,

1895, at Elmira, Susy stood on the platform in the blaze of the electric

light waving her good-byes to us as the train glided away, her mother

throwing back kisses and watching her through her tears.  One year, one

month, and one week later, Clara and her mother having exactly completed

the circuit of the globe, drew up at that platform at the same hour of

the night, in the same train and the same car--and again Susy had come a

journey and was near at hand to meet them.  She was waiting in the house

she was born in, in her coffin.



All the circumstances of this death were pathetic--my brain is worn to

rags rehearsing them.  The mere death would have been cruelty enough,

without overloading it and emphasizing it with that score of harsh and

wanton details.  The child was taken away when her mother was within

three days of her, and would have given three decades for sight of her.



In my despair and unassuageable misery I upbraid myself for ever parting

with her.  But there is no use in that.  Since it was to happen it would

have happened.

                         With love

                                        S. L. C.





     The life at Tedworth Square that winter was one of almost complete

     privacy.  Of the hundreds of friends which Mark Twain had in London

     scarcely half a dozen knew his address.  He worked steadily on his

     book of travels, 'Following the Equator', and wrote few letters

     beyond business communications to Mr. Rogers.  In one of these he

     said, "I am appalled!  Here I am trying to load you up with work

     again after you have been dray-horsing over the same tiresome ground

     for a year.  It's too bad, and I am ashamed of it."



     But late in November he sent a letter of a different sort--one that

     was to have an important bearing on the life of a girl today of

     unique and world-wide distinction.





                To Mrs. H.  H.  Rogers, in New York City:



For and in behalf of Helen Keller,

stone blind and deaf, and formerly dumb.



DEAR MRS. ROGERS,--Experience has convinced me that when one wishes to

set a hard-worked man at something which he mightn't prefer to be

bothered with, it is best to move upon him behind his wife.  If she can't

convince him it isn't worth while for other people to try.



Mr. Rogers will remember our visit with that astonishing girl at Lawrence

Hutton's house when she was fourteen years old.  Last July, in Boston,

when she was 16 she underwent the Harvard examination for admission to

Radcliffe College.  She passed without a single condition.  She was

allowed the same amount of time that is granted to other applicants, and

this was shortened in her case by the fact that the question papers had

to be read to her.  Yet she scored an average of 90 as against an average

of 78 on the part of the other applicants.



It won't do for America to allow this marvelous child to retire from her

studies because of poverty.  If she can go on with them she will make a

fame that will endure in history for centuries.  Along her special lines

she is the most extraordinary product of all the ages.



There is danger that she must retire from the struggle for a College

degree for lack of support for herself and for Miss Sullivan, (the

teacher who has been with her from the start--Mr. Rogers will remember

her.)  Mrs. Hutton writes to ask me to interest rich Englishmen in her

case, and I would gladly try, but my secluded life will not permit it.

I see nobody.  Nobody knows my address.  Nothing but the strictest hiding

can enable me to write my long book in time.



So I thought of this scheme: Beg you to lay siege to your husband and get

him to interest himself and Mess. John D. and William Rockefeller and the

other Standard Oil chiefs in Helen's case; get them to subscribe an

annual aggregate of six or seven hundred or a thousand dollars--and agree

to continue this for three or four years, until she has completed her

college course.  I'm not trying to limit their generosity--indeed no,

they may pile that Standard Oil, Helen Keller College Fund as high as

they please, they have my consent.



Mrs. Hutton's idea is to raise a permanent fund the interest upon which

shall support Helen and her teacher and put them out of the fear of want.

I shan't say a word against it, but she will find it a difficult and

disheartening job, and meanwhile what is to become of that miraculous

girl?



No, for immediate and sound effectiveness, the thing is for you to plead

with Mr. Rogers for this hampered wonder of your sex, and send him

clothed with plenary powers to plead with the other chiefs--they have

spent mountains of money upon the worthiest benevolences, and I think

that the same spirit which moved them to put their hands down through

their hearts into their pockets in those cases will answer "Here!" when

its name is called in this one.  638



There--I don't need to apologize to you or to H. H. for this appeal that

I am making; I know you too well for that.



Good-bye with love to all of you

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.



Laurence Hutton is on the staff of Harper's Monthly--close by, and handy

when wanted.





     The plea was not made in vain.  Mr. and Mrs. Rogers interested

     themselves most liberally in Helen Keller's fortune, and certainly

     no one can say that any of those who contributed to her success ever

     had reason for disappointment.



     In his letter of grateful acknowledgment, which follows, Clemens

     also takes occasion to thank Mr. Rogers for his further efforts in

     the matter of his own difficulties.  This particular reference

     concerns the publishing, complications which by this time had arisen

     between the American Publishing Company, of Hartford, and the house

     in Franklin Square.





                                             LONDON, Dec.  22, '96.

DEAR MRS. ROGERS,--It is superb!  And I am beyond measure grateful to you

both.  I knew you would be interested in that wonderful girl, and that

Mr. Rogers was already interested in her and touched by her; and I was

sure that if nobody else helped her you two would; but you have gone far

and away beyond the sum I expected--may your lines fall in pleasant

places here and Hereafter for it!



The Huttons are as glad and grateful as they can be, and I am glad for

their sakes as well as for Helen's.



I want to thank Mr. Rogers for crucifying himself again on the same old

cross between Bliss and Harper; and goodness knows I hope he will come to

enjoy it above all other dissipations yet, seeing that it has about it

the elements of stability and permanency.  However, at any time that he

says sign, we're going to do it.

                         Ever sincerely Yours

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.









XXXVI



LETTERS 1897.  LONDON, SWITZERLAND, VIENNA



Mark Twain worked steadily on his book that sad winter and managed to

keep the gloom out of his chapters, though it is noticeable that

'Following the Equator' is more serious than his other books of travel.

He wrote few letters, and these only to his three closest friends,

Howells, Twichell, and Rogers.  In the letter to Twichell, which follows,

there is mention of two unfinished manuscripts which he expects to

resume.  One of these was a dream story, enthusiastically begun, but

perhaps with insufficient plot to carry it through, for it never reached

conclusion.  He had already tried it in one or two forms and would begin

it again presently.  The identity of the other tale is uncertain.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             LONDON, Jan. 19, '97.

DEAR JOE,--Do I want you to write to me?  Indeed I do.  I do not want

most people to write, but I do want you to do it.  The others break my

heart, but you will not.  You have a something divine in you that is not

in other men.  You have the touch that heals, not lacerates.  And you

know the secret places of our hearts.  You know our life--the outside of

it--as the others do--and the inside of it--which they do not.  You have

seen our whole voyage.  You have seen us go to sea, a cloud of sail--and

the flag at the peak; and you see us now, chartless, adrift--derelicts;

battered, water-logged, our sails a ruck of rags, our pride gone.  For it

is gone.  And there is nothing in its place.  The vanity of life was all

we had, and there is no more vanity left in us.  We are even ashamed of

that we had; ashamed that we trusted the promises of life and builded

high--to come to this!



I did know that Susy was part of us; I did not know that she could go

away; I did not know that she could go away, and take our lives with her,

yet leave our dull bodies behind.  And I did not know what she was.  To

me she was but treasure in the bank; the amount known, the need to look

at it daily, handle it, weigh it, count it, realize it, not necessary;

and now that I would do it, it is too late; they tell me it is not there,

has vanished away in a night, the bank is broken, my fortune is gone, I

am a pauper.  How am I to comprehend this?  How am I to have it?  Why am

I robbed, and who is benefited?



Ah, well, Susy died at home.  She had that privilege.  Her dying eyes

rested upon nothing that was strange to them, but only upon things which

they had known and loved always and which had made her young years glad;

and she had you, and Sue, and Katy, and John, and Ellen.  This was happy

fortune--I am thankful that it was vouchsafed to her.  If she had died in

another house-well, I think I could not have borne that.  To us, our

house was not unsentient matter--it had a heart, and a soul, and eyes to

see us with; and approvals, and solicitudes, and deep sympathies; it was

of us, and we were in its confidence, and lived in its grace and in the

peace of its benediction.  We never came home from an absence that its

face did not light up and speak out its eloquent welcome--and we could

not enter it unmoved.  And could we now, oh, now, in spirit we should

enter it unshod.



I am trying to add to the "assets" which you estimate so generously.

No, I am not.  The thought is not in my mind.  My purpose is other.  I am

working, but it is for the sake of the work--the "surcease of sorrow"

that is found there.  I work all the days, and trouble vanishes away when

I use that magic.  This book will not long stand between it and me, now;

but that is no matter, I have many unwritten books to fly to for my

preservation; the interval between the finishing of this one and the

beginning of the next will not be more than an hour, at most.

Continuances, I mean; for two of them are already well along--in fact

have reached exactly the same stage in their journey: 19,000 words each.

The present one will contain 180,000 words--130,000 are done.  I am well

protected; but Livy!  She has nothing in the world to turn to; nothing

but housekeeping, and doing things for the children and me.  She does not

see people, and cannot; books have lost their interest for her.  She sits

solitary; and all the day, and all the days, wonders how it all happened,

and why.  We others were always busy with our affairs, but Susy was her

comrade--had to be driven from her loving persecutions--sometimes at 1 in

the morning.  To Livy the persecutions were welcome.  It was heaven to

her to be plagued like that.  But it is ended now.  Livy stands so in

need of help; and none among us all could help her like you.



Some day you and I will walk again, Joe, and talk.  I hope so.  We could

have such talks!  We are all grateful to you and Harmony--how grateful it

is not given to us to say in words.  We pay as we can, in love; and in

this coin practicing no economy.

                         Good bye, dear old Joe!

                                                  MARK.





     The letters to Mr. Rogers were, for the most part, on matters of

     business, but in one of them he said: "I am going to write with all

     my might on this book, and follow it up with others as fast as I can

     in the hope that within three years I can clear out the stuff that

     is in me waiting to be written, and that I shall then die in the

     promptest kind of a way and no fooling around."  And in one he

     wrote: "You are the best friend ever a man had, and the surest."





                      To W. D. Howells, in New York



                                                  LONDON, Feb. 23, '97.

DEAR HOWELLS,-I find your generous article in the Weekly, and I want to

thank you for its splendid praises, so daringly uttered and so warmly.

The words stir the dead heart of me, and throw a glow of color into a

life which sometimes seems to have grown wholly wan.  I don't mean that I

am miserable; no--worse than that--indifferent.  Indifferent to nearly

everything but work.  I like that; I enjoy it, and stick to it.  I do it

without purpose and without ambition; merely for the love of it.



This mood will pass, some day--there is history for it.  But it cannot

pass until my wife comes up out of the submergence.  She was always so

quick to recover herself before, but now there is no rebound, and we are

dead people who go through the motions of life.  Indeed I am a mud image,

and it will puzzle me to know what it is in me that writes, and has

comedy-fancies and finds pleasure in phrasing them.  It is a law of our

nature, of course, or it wouldn't happen; the thing in me forgets the

presence of the mud image and goes its own way, wholly unconscious of it

and apparently of no kinship with it.  I have finished my book, but I go

on as if the end were indefinitely away--as indeed it is.  There is no

hurry--at any rate there is no limit.



Jean's spirits are good; Clara's are rising.  They have youth--the only

thing that was worth giving to the race.



These are sardonic times.  Look at Greece, and that whole shabby muddle.

But I am not sorry to be alive and privileged to look on.  If I were not

a hermit I would go to the House every day and see those people scuffle

over it and blether about the brotherhood of the human race.  This has

been a bitter year for English pride, and I don't like to see England

humbled--that is, not too much.  We are sprung from her loins, and it

hurts me.  I am for republics, and she is the only comrade we've got, in

that.  We can't count France, and there is hardly enough of Switzerland

to count.  Beneath the governing crust England is sound-hearted--and

sincere, too, and nearly straight.  But I am appalled to notice that the

wide extension of the surface has damaged her manners, and made her

rather Americanly uncourteous on the lower levels.



Won't you give our love to the Howellses all and particular?

                         Sincerely yours

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.





     The travel-book did not finish easily, and more than once when he

     thought it completed he found it necessary to cut and add and

     change.  The final chapters were not sent to the printer until the

     middle of May, and in a letter to Mr. Rogers he commented: "A

     successful book is not made of what is in it, but what is left out

     of it."  Clemens was at the time contemplating a uniform edition of

     his books, and in one of his letters to Mr. Rogers on the matter he

     wrote, whimsically, "Now I was proposing to make a thousand sets at

     a hundred dollars a set, and do the whole canvassing myself.....  I

     would load up every important jail and saloon in America with de

     luxe editions of my books.  But Mrs. Clemens and the children object

     to this, I do not know why."  And, in a moment of depression: "You

     see the lightning refuses to strike me--there is where the defect

     is.  We have to do our own striking as Barney Barnato did.  But

     nobody ever gets the courage until he goes crazy."



     They went to Switzerland for the summer to the village of Weggis, on

     Lake Lucerne--"The charmingest place we ever lived in," he declared,

     "for repose, and restfulness, and superb scenery."  It was here that

     he began work on a new story of Tom and Huck, and at least upon one

     other manuscript.  From a brief note to Mr. Rogers we learn

     something of his employments and economies.





                    To Henry H.  Rogers, in New York:



                         LUCERNE, August the something or other, 1897.

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--I am writing a novel, and am getting along very well

with it.



I believe that this place (Weggis, half an hour from Lucerne,) is the

loveliest in the world, and the most satisfactory.  We have a small house

on the hillside all to ourselves, and our meals are served in it from the

inn below on the lake shore.  Six francs a day per head, house and food

included.  The scenery is beyond comparison beautiful.  We have a row

boat and some bicycles, and good roads, and no visitors.  Nobody knows we

are here.  And Sunday in heaven is noisy compared to this quietness.

                         Sincerely yours

                                        S. L. C.





                  To Rev. J.  H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



                                                  LUCERNE, Aug. 22, '97.

DEAR JOE,--Livy made a noble find on the Lucerne boat the other day on

one of her shopping trips--George Williamson Smith--did I tell you about

it?  We had a lovely time with him, and such intellectual refreshment as

we had not tasted in many a month.



And the other night we had a detachment of the jubilee Singers--6.  I had

known one of them in London 24 years ago.  Three of the 6 were born in

slavery, the others were children of slaves.  How charming they were--in

spirit, manner, language, pronunciation, enunciation, grammar, phrasing,

matter, carriage, clothes--in every detail that goes to make the real

lady and gentleman, and welcome guest.  We went down to the village hotel

and bought our tickets and entered the beer-hall, where a crowd of German

and Swiss men and women sat grouped at round tables with their beer mugs

in front of them--self-contained and unimpressionable looking people, an

indifferent and unposted and disheartened audience--and up at the far end

of the room sat the Jubilees in a row.  The Singers got up and stood--the

talking and glass jingling went on.  Then rose and swelled out above

those common earthly sounds one of those rich chords the secret of whose

make only the Jubilees possess, and a spell fell upon that house.  It was

fine to see the faces light up with the pleased wonder and surprise of

it.  No one was indifferent any more; and when the singers finished, the

camp was theirs.  It was a triumph.  It reminded me of Launcelot riding

in Sir Kay's armor and astonishing complacent Knights who thought they

had struck a soft thing.  The Jubilees sang a lot of pieces.  Arduous and

painstaking cultivation has not diminished or artificialized their music,

but on the contrary--to my surprise--has mightily reinforced its

eloquence and beauty.  Away back in the beginning--to my mind--their

music made all other vocal music cheap; and that early notion is

emphasized now.  It is utterly beautiful, to me; and it moves me

infinitely more than any other music can.  I think that in the Jubilees

and their songs America has produced the perfectest flower of the ages;

and I wish it were a foreign product, so that she would worship it and

lavish money on it and go properly crazy over it.



Now, these countries are different: they would do all that, if it were

native.  It is true they praise God, but that is merely a formality, and

nothing in it; they open out their whole hearts to no foreigner.



The musical critics of the German press praise the Jubilees with great

enthusiasm--acquired technique etc, included.



One of the jubilee men is a son of General Joe Johnson, and was educated

by him after the war.  The party came up to the house and we had a

pleasant time.



This is paradise, here--but of course we have got to leave it by and by.

The 18th of August--[Anniversary of Susy Clemens's death.]--has come and

gone, Joe--and we still seem to live.

                         With love from us all.

                                                  MARK.





     Clemens declared he would as soon spend his life in Weggis "as

     anywhere else in the geography," but October found them in Vienna

     for the winter, at the Hotel Metropole.  The Austrian capital was

     just then in a political turmoil, the character of which is hinted

     in the following:





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             HOTEL METROPOLE,

                                                  VIENNA, Oct. 23, '97.

DEAR JOE,--We are gradually getting settled down and wonted.  Vienna is

not a cheap place to live in, but I have made one small arrangement

which: has a distinctly economical aspect.  The Vice Consul made the

contract for me yesterday-to-wit: a barber is to come every morning 8.30

and shave me and keep my hair trimmed for $2.50 a month.  I used to pay

$1.50 per shave in our house in Hartford.



Does it suggest to you reflections when you reflect that this is the most

important event which has happened to me in ten days--unless I count--in

my handing a cabman over to the police day before yesterday, with the

proper formalities, and promised to appear in court when his case comes

up.



If I had time to run around and talk, I would do it; for there is much

politics agoing, and it would be interesting if a body could get the hang

of it.  It is Christian and Jew by the horns--the advantage with the

superior man, as usual--the superior man being the Jew every time and in

all countries.  Land, Joe, what chance would the Christian have in a

country where there were 3 Jews to 10 Christians!  Oh, not the shade of a

shadow of a chance.  The difference between the brain of the average

Christian and that of the average Jew--certainly in Europe--is about the

difference between a tadpole's and an Archbishop's.  It's a marvelous,

race--by long odds the most marvelous that the world has produced, I

suppose.



And there's more politics--the clash between Czech and Austrian.  I wish

I could understand these quarrels, but of course I can't.



With the abounding love of us all

                                        MARK.





     In Following the Equator there was used an amusing picture showing

     Mark Twain on his trip around the world.  It was a trick photograph

     made from a picture of Mark Twain taken in a steamer-chair, cut out

     and combined with a dilapidated negro-cart drawn by a horse and an

     ox.  In it Clemens appears to be sitting luxuriously in the end of

     the disreputable cart.  His companions are two negroes.  To the

     creator of this ingenious effect Mark Twain sent a characteristic

     acknowledgment.





                             To T. S. Frisbie



                                                  VIENNA, Oct. 25, '97.

MR. T. S. FRISBIE,--Dear Sir:  The picture has reached me, and has moved

me deeply.  That was a steady, sympathetic and honorable team, and

although it was not swift, and not showy, it pulled me around the globe

successfully, and always attracted its proper share of attention, even in

the midst of the most costly and fashionable turnouts.  Princes and dukes

and other experts were always enthused by the harness and could hardly

keep from trying to buy it.  The barouche does not look as fine, now, as

it did earlier-but that was before the earthquake.



The portraits of myself and uncle and nephew are very good indeed, and

your impressionist reproduction of the palace of the Governor General of

India is accurate and full of tender feeling.



I consider that this picture is much more than a work of art.  How much

more, one cannot say with exactness, but I should think two-thirds more.



                    Very truly yours

                                   MARK TWAIN.





     Following the Equator was issued by subscription through Mark

     Twain's old publishers, the Blisses, of Hartford.  The sale of it

     was large, not only on account of the value of the book itself, but

     also because of the sympathy of the American people with Mark

     Twain's brave struggle to pay his debts.  When the newspapers began

     to print exaggerated stories of the vast profits that were piling

     up, Bliss became worried, for he thought it would modify the

     sympathy.  He cabled Clemens for a denial, with the following

     result:





                     To Frank E.  Bliss, in Hartford:



                                             VIENNA, Nov. 4, 1897.

DEAR BLISS,--Your cablegram informing me that a report is in circulation

which purports to come from me and which says I have recently made

$82,000 and paid all my debts has just reached me, and I have cabled

back my regret to you that it is not true.  I wrote a letter--a private

letter--a short time ago, in which I expressed the belief that I should

be out of debt within the next twelvemonth.  If you make as much as usual

for me out of the book, that belief will crystallize into a fact, and I

shall be wholly out of debt.  I am encoring you now.



It is out of that moderate letter that the Eighty-Two Thousand-Dollar

mare's nest has developed.  But why do you worry about the various

reports?  They do not worry me.  They are not unfriendly, and I don't see

how they can do any harm.  Be patient; you have but a little while to

wait; the possible reports are nearly all in.  It has been reported that

I was seriously ill--it was another man; dying--it was another man; dead

--the other man again.  It has been reported that I have received a

legacy it was another man; that I am out of debt--it was another man; and

now comes this $82,000--still another man.  It has been reported that I

am writing books--for publication; I am not doing anything of the kind.

It would surprise (and gratify) me if I should be able to get another

book ready for the press within the next three years.  You can see,

yourself, that there isn't anything more to be reported--invention is

exhausted.  Therefore, don't worry, Bliss--the long night is breaking.

As far as I can see, nothing remains to be reported, except that I have

become a foreigner.  When you hear it, don't you believe it.  And don't

take the trouble to deny it.  Merely just raise the American flag on our

house in Hartford, and let it talk.

                                   Truly yours,

                                             MARK TWAIN.



P. S.  This is not a private letter.  I am getting tired of private

letters.





                  To Rev. J.  H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             VIENNA

                                        HOTEL METROPOLE, NOV. 19, '97.

DEAR JOE,--Above is our private (and permanent) address for the winter.

You needn't send letters by London.



I am very much obliged for Forrest's Austro-Hungarian articles.  I have

just finished reading the first one: and in it I find that his opinion

and Vienna's are the same, upon a point which was puzzling me--the

paucity (no, the absence) of Austrian Celebrities.  He and Vienna both

say the country cannot afford to allow great names to grow up; that the

whole safety and prosperity of the Empire depends upon keeping things

quiet; can't afford to have geniuses springing up and developing ideas

and stirring the public soul.  I am assured that every time a man finds

himself blooming into fame, they just softly snake him down and relegate

him to a wholesome obscurity.  It is curious and interesting.



Three days ago the New York World sent and asked a friend of mine

(correspondent of a London daily) to get some Christmas greetings from

the celebrities of the Empire.  She spoke of this.  Two or three bright

Austrians were present.  They said "There are none who are known all over

the world! none who have achieved fame; none who can point to their work

and say it is known far and wide in the earth: there are no names;

Kossuth (known because he had a father) and Lecher, who made the 12 hour

speech; two names-nothing more.  Every other country in the world,

perhaps, has a giant or two whose heads are away up and can be seen, but

ours.  We've got the material--have always had it--but we have to

suppress it; we can't afford to let it develop; our political salvation

depends upon tranquillity--always has."



Poor Livy!  She is laid up with rheumatism; but she is getting along now.

We have a good doctor, and he says she will be out of bed in a couple of

days, but must stay in the house a week or ten.



Clara is working faithfully at her music, Jean at her usual studies, and

we all send love.

                              MARK.





     Mention has already been made of the political excitement in Vienna.

     The trouble between the Hungarian and German legislative bodies

     presently became violent.  Clemens found himself intensely

     interested, and was present in one of the galleries when it was

     cleared by the police.  All sorts of stories were circulated as to

     what happened to him, one of which was cabled to America.  A letter

     to Twichell sets forth what really happened.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                                  HOTEL METROPOLE,

                                                  VIENNA, Dec. 10, '97.

DEAR JOE,--Pond sends me a Cleveland paper with a cablegram from here in

it which says that when the police invaded the parliament and expelled

the 11 members I waved my handkerchief and shouted 'Hoch die Deutschen!'

and got hustled out.  Oh dear, what a pity it is that one's adventures

never happen!  When the Ordner (sergeant-at-arms) came up to our gallery

and was hurrying the people out, a friend tried to get leave for me to

stay, by saying, "But this gentleman is a foreigner--you don't need to

turn him out--he won't do any harm."



"Oh, I know him very well--I recognize him by his pictures; and I should

be very glad to let him stay, but I haven't any choice, because of the

strictness of the orders."



And so we all went out, and no one was hustled.  Below, I ran across the

London Times correspondent, and he showed me the way into the first

gallery and I lost none of the show.  The first gallery had not

misbehaved, and was not disturbed.



.  .  .  We cannot persuade Livy to go out in society yet, but all the

lovely people come to see her; and Clara and I go to dinner parties, and

around here and there, and we all have a most hospitable good time.

Jean's woodcarving flourishes, and her other studies.



Good-bye Joe--and we all love all of you.

                                             MARK.





     Clemens made an article of the Austrian troubles, one of the best

     things he ever wrote, and certainly one of the clearest elucidations

     of the Austro-Hungarian confusions.  It was published in Harper's

     Magazine, and is now included in his complete works.



     Thus far none of the Webster Company debts had been paid--at least,

     none of importance.  The money had been accumulating in Mr. Rogers's

     hands, but Clemens was beginning to be depressed by the heavy

     burden.  He wrote asking for relief.





              Part of a letter to H. H. Rogers, in New York:



DEAR MR. ROGERS,--I throw up the sponge.  I pull down the flag.  Let us

begin on the debts.  I cannot bear the weight any longer.  It totally

unfits me for work.  I have lost three entire months now.  In that time I

have begun twenty magazine articles and books--and flung every one of

them aside in turn.  The debts interfered every time, and took the spirit

out of any work.  And yet I have worked like a bond slave and wasted no

time and spared no effort----



Rogers wrote, proposing a plan for beginning immediately upon the debts.

Clemens replied enthusiastically, and during the next few weeks wrote

every few days, expressing his delight in liquidation.





          Extracts from letters to H.  H.  Rogers, in New York:



.  .  .  We all delighted with your plan.  Only don't leave B--out.

Apparently that claim has been inherited by some women--daughters, no

doubt.  We don't want to see them lose any thing.  B----- is an ass, and

disgruntled, but I don't care for that.  I am responsible for the money

and must do the best I can to pay it.....  I am writing hard--writing for

the creditors.





                                                            Dec.  29.

Land we are glad to see those debts diminishing.  For the first time in

my life I am getting more pleasure out of paying money out than pulling

it in.





                                                            Jan.  2.

Since we have begun to pay off the debts I have abundant peace of mind

again--no sense of burden.  Work is become a pleasure again--it is not

labor any longer.





                                                            March 7.

Mrs. Clemens has been reading the creditors' letters over and over again

and thanks you deeply for sending them, and says it is the only really

happy day she has had since Susy died.









XXXVII



LETTERS, 1898, TO HOWELLS AND TWICHELL.  LIFE IN VIENNA.  PAYMENT OF THE

DEBTS.  ASSASSINATION OF THE EMPRESS



The end of January saw the payment of the last of Mark Twain's debts.

Once more he stood free before the world--a world that sounded his

praises.  The latter fact rather amused him.  "Honest men must be pretty

scarce," he said, "when they make so much fuss over even a defective

specimen."  When the end was in sight Clemens wrote the news to Howells

in a letter as full of sadness as of triumph.





                      To W. D. Howells, in New York:



                                        HOTEL METROPOLE,

                                             VIENNA, Jan. 22, '98.

DEAR HOWELLS,--Look at those ghastly figures.  I used to write it

"Hartford, 1871."  There was no Susy then--there is no Susy now.  And how

much lies between--one long lovely stretch of scented fields, and

meadows, and shady woodlands, and suddenly Sahara!  You speak of the

glorious days of that old time--and they were.  It is my quarrel--that

traps like that are set.  Susy and Winnie given us, in miserable sport,

and then taken away.



About the last time I saw you I described to you the culminating disaster

in a book I was going to write (and will yet, when the stroke is further

away)--a man's dead daughter brought to him when he had been through all

other possible misfortunes--and I said it couldn't be done as it ought to

be done except by a man who had lived it--it must be written with the

blood out of a man's heart.  I couldn't know, then, how soon I was to be

made competent.  I have thought of it many a time since.  If you were

here I think we could cry down each other's necks, as in your dream.

For we are a pair of old derelicts drifting around, now, with some of our

passengers gone and the sunniness of the others in eclipse.



I couldn't get along without work now.  I bury myself in it up to the

ears.  Long hours--8 and 9 on a stretch, sometimes.  And all the days,

Sundays included.  It isn't all for print, by any means, for much of it

fails to suit me; 50,000 words of it in the past year.  It was because of

the deadness which invaded me when Susy died.  But I have made a change

lately--into dramatic work--and I find it absorbingly entertaining.

I don't know that I can write a play that will play: but no matter, I'll

write half a dozen that won't, anyway.  Dear me, I didn't know there was

such fun in it.  I'll write twenty that won't play.  I get into immense

spirits as soon as my day is fairly started.  Of course a good deal of

this friskiness comes of my being in sight of land--on the Webster & Co.

debts, I mean.  (Private.) We've lived close to the bone and saved every

cent we could, and there's no undisputed claim, now, that we can't cash.

I have marked this "private" because it is for the friends who are

attending to the matter for us in New York to reveal it when they want to

and if they want to.  There are only two claims which I dispute and which

I mean to look into personally before I pay them.  But they are small.

Both together they amount to only $12,500.  I hope you will never get the

like of the load saddled onto you that was saddled onto me 3 years ago.

And yet there is such a solid pleasure in paying the things that I reckon

maybe it is worth while to get into that kind of a hobble, after all.

Mrs. Clemens gets millions of delight out of it; and the children have

never uttered one complaint about the scrimping, from the beginning.



We all send you and all of you our love.

                                             MARK.





     Howells wrote: "I wish you could understand how unshaken you are,

     you old tower, in every way; your foundations are struck so deep

     that you will catch the sunshine of immortal years, and bask in the

     same light as Cervantes and Shakespeare."



     The Clemens apartments at the Metropole became a sort of social

     clearing-house of the Viennese art and literary life, much more like

     an embassy than the home of a mere literary man.  Celebrities in

     every walk of life, persons of social and official rank, writers for

     the press, assembled there on terms hardly possible in any other

     home in Vienna.  Wherever Mark Twain appeared in public he was a

     central figure.  Now and then he read or spoke to aid some benefit,

     and these were great gatherings attended by members of the royal

     family.  It was following one such event that the next letter was

     written.





(Private)

                  To Rev. J.  H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             HOTEL METROPOLE,

                                                  VIENNA, Feb. 3, '98.

DEAR JOE, There's that letter that I began so long ago--you see how

it is: can't get time to finish anything.  I pile up lots of work,

nevertheless.  There may be idle people in the world, but I'm not one of

them.  I say "Private" up there because I've got an adventure to tell,

and you mustn't let a breath of it get out.  First I thought I would lay

it up along with a thousand others that I've laid up for the same

purpose--to talk to you about, but--those others have vanished out of my

memory; and that must not happen with this.



The other night I lectured for a Vienna charity; and at the end of it

Livy and I were introduced to a princess who is aunt to the heir apparent

of the imperial throne--a beautiful lady, with a beautiful spirit, and

very cordial in her praises of my books and thanks to me for writing

them; and glad to meet me face to face and shake me by the hand--just the

kind of princess that adorns a fairy tale and makes it the prettiest tale

there is.



Very well, we long ago found that when you are noticed by supremacies,

the correct etiquette is to go, within a couple of days, and pay your

respects in the quite simple form of writing your name in the Visitors'

Book kept in the office of the establishment.  That is the end of it, and

everything is squared up and ship-shape.



So at noon today Livy and I drove to the Archducal palace, and got by the

sentries all right, and asked the grandly-uniformed porter for the book

and said we wished to write our names in it.  And he called a servant in

livery and was sending us up stairs; and said her Royal Highness was out

but would soon be in.  Of course Livy said "No--no--we only want the

book;" but he was firm, and said, "You are Americans?"



"Yes."



"Then you are expected, please go up stairs."



"But indeed we are not expected--please let us have the book and--"



"Her Royal Highness will be back in a very little while--she commanded me

to tell you so--and you must wait."



Well, the soldiers were there close by--there was no use trying to

resist--so we followed the servant up; but when he tried to beguile us

into a drawing-room, Livy drew the line; she wouldn't go in.  And she

wouldn't stay up there, either.  She said the princess might come in at

any moment and catch us, and it would be too infernally ridiculous for

anything.  So we went down stairs again--to my unspeakable regret.  For

it was too darling a comedy to spoil.  I was hoping and praying the

princess would come, and catch us up there, and that those other

Americans who were expected would arrive, and be taken for impostors by

the portier, and shot by the sentinels--and then it would all go into the

papers, and be cabled all over the world, and make an immense stir and be

perfectly lovely.  And by that time the princess would discover that we

were not the right ones, and the Minister of War would be ordered out,

and the garrison, and they would come for us, and there would be another

prodigious time, and that would get cabled too, and--well, Joe, I was in

a state of perfect bliss.  But happily, oh, so happily, that big portier

wouldn't let us out--he was sorry, but he must obey orders--we must go

back up stairs and wait.  Poor Livy--I couldn't help but enjoy her

distress.  She said we were in a fix, and how were we going to explain,

if the princess should arrive before the rightful Americans came?  We

went up stairs again--laid off our wraps, and were conducted through one

drawing room and into another, and left alone there and the door closed

upon us.



Livy was in a state of mind!  She said it was too theatrically

ridiculous; and that I would never be able to keep my mouth shut; that I

would be sure to let it out and it would get into the papers--and she

tried to make me promise--"Promise what?" I said--"to be quiet about

this?  Indeed I won't--it's the best thing that ever happened; I'll tell

it, and add to it; and I wish Joe and Howells were here to make it

perfect; I can't make all the rightful blunders myself--it takes all

three of us to do justice to an opportunity like this.  I would just like

to see Howells get down to his work and explain, and lie, and work his

futile and inventionless subterfuges when that princess comes raging in

here and wanting to know."  But Livy could not hear fun--it was not a

time to be trying to be funny--we were in a most miserable and shameful

situation, and if--



Just then the door spread wide and our princess and 4 more, and 3 little

princes flowed in!  Our princess, and her sister the Archduchess Marie

Therese (mother to the imperial Heir and to the young girl Archduchesses

present, and aunt to the 3 little princes)--and we shook hands all around

and sat down and had a most sociable good time for half an hour--and by

and by it turned out that we were the right ones, and had been sent for

by a messenger who started too late to catch us at the hotel.  We were

invited for 2 o'clock, but we beat that arrangement by an hour and a

half.



Wasn't it a rattling good comedy situation?  Seems a kind of pity we were

the right ones.  It would have been such nuts to see the right ones come,

and get fired out, and we chatting along comfortably and nobody

suspecting us for impostors.



We send lots and lots of love.

                                   MARK.





     The reader who has followed these pages has seen how prone Mark

     Twain was to fall a victim to the lure of a patent-right--how he

     wasted several small fortunes on profitless contrivances, and one

     large one on that insatiable demon of intricacy and despair, the

     Paige type-setter.  It seems incredible that, after that experience

     and its attending disaster, he should have been tempted again.  But

     scarcely was the ink dry on the receipts from his creditors when he

     was once more borne into the clouds on the prospect of millions,

     perhaps even billions, to be made from a marvelous carpet-pattern

     machine, the invention of Sczezepanik, an Austrian genius.  That

     Clemens appreciated his own tendencies is shown by the parenthetic

     line with which he opens his letter on the subject to Mr. Rogers.

     Certainly no man was ever a more perfect prototype of Colonel

     Sellers than the creator of that lovely, irrepressible visionary.





                       To Mr. Rogers, in New York:



                                                       March 24, '98.

DEAR MR. ROGERS,--(I feel like Col. Sellers).



Mr. Kleinberg [agent for Sczezepanik] came according to appointment, at

8.30 last night, and brought his English-speaking Secretary.  I asked

questions about the auxiliary invention (which I call "No. 2 ") and got

as good an idea of it as I could.  It is a machine.  It automatically

punches the holes in the jacquard cards, and does it with mathematical

accuracy.  It will do for $1 what now costs $3.  So it has value, but

"No. 2" is the great thing(the designing invention.) It saves $9 out of

$10 and the jacquard looms must have it.



Then I arrived at my new project, and said to him in substance, this:



"You are on the point of selling the No. 2 patents to Belgium, Italy,

etc.  I suggest that you stop those negotiations and put those people off

two or three months.  They are anxious now, they will not be less anxious

then--just the reverse; people always want a thing that is denied them.



"So far as I know, no great world-patent has ever yet been placed in the

grip of a single corporation.  This is a good time to begin.



"We have to do a good deal of guess-work here, because we cannot get hold

of just the statistics we want.  Still, we have some good statistics--and

I will use those for a test.



"You say that of the 1500 Austrian textile factories, 800 use the

jacquard.  Then we will guess that of the 4,000 American factories 2,000

use the jacquard and must have our No. 2.



"You say that a middle-sized Austrian factory employs from 20 to 30

designers and pays them from 800 to 3,000 odd florins a year--(a florin

is 2 francs).  Let us call the average wage 1500 florins ($600).



"Let us apply these figures (the low wages too) to the 2,000 American

factories--with this difference, to guard against over-guessing; that

instead of allowing for 20 to 30 designers to a middle-sized factory, we

allow only an average of 10 to each of the 2,000 factories--a total of

20,000 designers.  Wages at $600, a total of $12,000,000.  Let us

consider that No. 2 will reduce this expense to $2,000,000 a year.  The

saving is $5,000,000 per each of the $200,000,000 of capital employed in

the jacquard business over there.



"Let us consider that in the countries covered by this patent, an

aggregate of $1,500,000,000 of capital is employed in factories requiring

No. 2.



"The saving (as above) is $75,000,000 a year.  The Company holding in its

grip all these patents would collar $50,000,000 of that, as its share.

Possibly more.



"Competition would be at an end in the Jacquard business, on this planet.

Price-cutting would end.  Fluctuations in values would cease.  The

business would be the safest and surest in the world; commercial panics

could not seriously affect it; its stock would be as choice an investment

as Government bonds.  When the patents died the Company would be so

powerful that it could still keep the whole business in its hands.  Would

you like to grant me the privilege of placing the whole jacquard business

of the world in the grip of a single Company?  And don't you think that

the business would grow-grow like a weed?"



"Ach, America--it is the country of the big!  Let me get my breath--then

we will talk."



So then we talked--talked till pretty late.  Would Germany and England

join the combination?  I said the Company would know how to persuade

them.



Then I asked for a Supplementary Option, to cover the world, and we

parted.



I am taking all precautions to keep my name out of print in connection

with this matter.  And we will now keep the invention itself out of print

as well as we can.  Descriptions of it have been granted to the "Dry

Goods Economist" (New York) and to a syndicate of American papers.  I

have asked Mr. Kleinberg to suppress these, and he feels pretty sure he

can do it.

               With love,

                              S. L. C.





     If this splendid enthusiasm had not cooled by the time a reply came

     from Mr. Rogers, it must have received a sudden chill from the

     letter which he inclosed--the brief and concise report from a

     carpet-machine expert, who said: "I do not feel that it would be of

     any value to us in our mills, and the number of jacquard looms in

     America is so limited that I am of the opinion that there is no

     field for a company to develop the invention here.  A cursory

     examination of the pamphlet leads me to place no very high value

     upon the invention, from a practical standpoint."



     With the receipt of this letter carpet-pattern projects would seem

     to have suddenly ceased to be a factor in Mark Twain's calculations.

     Such a letter in the early days of the type-machine would have saved

     him a great sum in money and years of disappointment.  But perhaps

     he would not have heeded it then.



     The year 1898 brought the Spanish-American War.  Clemens was

     constitutionally against all wars, but writing to Twichell, whose

     son had enlisted, we gather that this one was an exception.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                        KALTENLEUTGEBEN, NEAR VIENNA,

                                                       June 17, '98.

DEAR JOE,--You are living your war-days over again in Dave, and it must

be a strong pleasure, mixed with a sauce of apprehension--enough to make

it just schmeck, as the Germans say.  Dave will come out with two or

three stars on his shoulder-straps if the war holds, and then we shall

all be glad it happened.



We started with Bull Run, before.  Dewey and Hobson have introduced an

improvement on the game this time.



I have never enjoyed a war-even in written history--as I am enjoying this

one.  For this is the worthiest one that was ever fought, so far as my

knowledge goes.  It is a worthy thing to fight for one's freedom; it is

another sight finer to fight for another man's.  And I think this is the

first time it has been done.



Oh, never mind Charley Warner, he would interrupt the raising of Lazarus.

He would say, the will has been probated, the property distributed, it

will be a world of trouble to settle the rows--better leave well enough

alone; don't ever disturb anything, where it's going to break the soft

smooth flow of things and wobble our tranquillity.



Company!  (Sh! it happens every day--and we came out here to be quiet.)



Love to you all.

                         MARK.





     They were spending the summer at Kaltenleutgeben, a pleasant village

     near Vienna, but apparently not entirely quiet.  Many friends came

     out from Vienna, including a number of visiting Americans.  Clemens,

     however, appears to have had considerable time for writing, as we

     gather from the next to Howells.





                      To W. D. Howells, in America:



                                        KALTENLEUTGEBEN, BEI WIEN,

                                                       Aug. 16, '98.

DEAR HOWELLS,--Your letter came yesterday.  It then occurred to me that I

might have known (per mental telegraph) that it was due; for a couple of

weeks ago when the Weekly came containing that handsome reference to me I

was powerfully moved to write you; and my letter went on writing itself

while I was at work at my other literature during the day.  But next day

my other literature was still urgent--and so on and so on; so my letter

didn't get put into ink at all.  But I see now, that you were writing,

about that time, therefore a part of my stir could have come across the

Atlantic per mental telegraph.  In 1876 or '75 I wrote 40,000 words of a

story called "Simon Wheeler" wherein the nub was the preventing of an

execution through testimony furnished by mental telegraph from the other

side of the globe.  I had a lot of people scattered about the globe who

carried in their pockets something like the old mesmerizer-button, made

of different metals, and when they wanted to call up each other and have

a talk, they "pressed the button" or did something, I don't remember

what, and communication was at once opened.  I didn't finish the story,

though I re-began it in several new ways, and spent altogether 70,000

words on it, then gave it up and threw it aside.



This much as preliminary to this remark: some day people will be able to

call each other up from any part of the world and talk by mental

telegraph--and not merely by impression, the impression will be

articulated into words.  It could be a terrible thing, but it won't be,

because in the upper civilizations everything like sentimentality (I was

going to say sentiment) will presently get materialized out of people

along with the already fading spiritualities; and so when a man is called

who doesn't wish to talk he will be like those visitors you mention: "not

chosen"--and will be frankly damned and shut off.



Speaking of the ill luck of starting a piece of literary work wrong-and

again and again; always aware that there is a way, if you could only

think it out, which would make the thing slide effortless from the pen

--the one right way, the sole form for you, the other forms being for men

whose line those forms are, or who are capabler than yourself: I've had

no end of experience in that (and maybe I am the only one--let us hope

so.) Last summer I started 16 things wrong--3 books and 13 mag.

articles--and could only make 2 little wee things, 1500 words altogether,

succeed:--only that out of piles and stacks of diligently-wrought MS.,

the labor of 6 weeks' unremitting effort.  I could make all of those

things go if I would take the trouble to re-begin each one half a dozen

times on a new plan.  But none of them was important enough except one:

the story I (in the wrong form) mapped out in Paris three or four years

ago and told you about in New York under seal of confidence--no other

person knows of it but Mrs. Clemens--the story to be called "Which was

the Dream?"



A week ago I examined the MS--10,000 words--and saw that the plan was a

totally impossible one-for me; but a new plan suggested itself, and

straightway the tale began to slide from the pen with ease and

confidence.  I think I've struck the right one this time.  I have already

put 12,000 words of it on paper and Mrs. Clemens is pretty outspokenly

satisfied with it-a hard critic to content.  I feel sure that all of the

first half of the story--and I hope three-fourths--will be comedy; but by

the former plan the whole of it (except the first 3 chapters) would have

been tragedy and unendurable, almost.  I think I can carry the reader a

long way before he suspects that I am laying a tragedy-trap.  In the

present form I could spin 16 books out of it with comfort and joy; but I

shall deny myself and restrict it to one.  (If you should see a little

short story in a magazine in the autumn called "My Platonic Sweetheart"

written 3 weeks ago) that is not this one.  It may have been a

suggester, though.



I expect all these singular privacies to interest you, and you are not to

let on that they don't.



We are leaving, this afternoon, for Ischl, to use that as a base for the

baggage, and then gad around ten days among the lakes and mountains to

rest-up Mrs. Clemens, who is jaded with housekeeping.  I hope I can get a

chance to work a little in spots--I can't tell.  But you do it--therefore

why should you think I can't?



                           [Remainder missing.]





     The dream story was never completed.  It was the same that he had

     worked on in London, and perhaps again in Switzerland.  It would be

     tried at other times and in other forms, but it never seemed to

     accommodate itself to a central idea, so that the good writing in it

     eventually went to waste.  The short story mentioned, "My Platonic

     Sweetheart," a charming, idyllic tale, was not published during Mark

     Twain's lifetime.  Two years after his death it appeared in Harper's

     Magazine.



     The assassination of the Empress of Austria at Geneva was the

     startling event of that summer.  In a letter to Twichell Clemens

     presents the tragedy in a few vivid paragraphs.  Later he treated it

     at some length in a magazine article which, very likely because of

     personal relations with members of the Austrian court, he withheld

     from print.  It has since been included in a volume of essays, What

     Is Man, etc.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                        KALTENLEUTGEBEN, Sep.  13, '98.

DEAR JOE,--You are mistaken; people don't send us the magazines.  No

--Harper, Century and McClure do; an example I should like to recommend to

other publishers.  And so I thank you very much for sending me Brander's

article.  When you say "I like Brander Matthews; he impresses me as a man

of parts and power," I back you, right up to the hub--I feel the same

way--.  And when you say he has earned your gratitude for cuffing me for

my crimes against the Leather stockings and the Vicar, I ain't making any

objection.  Dern your gratitude!



His article is as sound as a nut.  Brander knows literature, and loves

it; he can talk about it and keep his temper; he can state his case so

lucidly and so fairly and so forcibly that you have to agree with him,

even when you don't agree with him; and he can discover and praise such

merits as a book has, even when they are half a dozen diamonds scattered

through an acre of mud.  And so he has a right to be a critic.



To detail just the opposite of the above invoice is to describe me.  I

haven't any right to criticise books, and I don't do it except when I

hate them.  I often want to criticise Jane Austen, but her books madden

me so that I can't conceal my frenzy from the reader; and therefore I

have to stop every time I begin.



That good and unoffending lady the Empress is killed by a mad-man, and I

am living in the midst of world-history again.  The Queen's jubilee last

year, the invasion of the Reichsrath by the police, and now this murder,

which will still be talked of and described and painted a thousand years

from now.  To have a personal friend of the wearer of the crown burst in

at the gate in the deep dusk of the evening and say in a voice broken

with tears, "My God the Empress is murdered," and fly toward her home

before we can utter a question-why, it brings the giant event home to

you, makes you a part of it and personally interested; it is as if your

neighbor Antony should come flying and say "Caesar is butchered--the head

of the world is fallen!"



Of course there is no talk but of this.  The mourning is universal and

genuine, the consternation is stupefying.  The Austrian Empire is being

draped with black.  Vienna will be a spectacle to see, by next Saturday,

when the funeral cortege marches.  We are invited to occupy a room in the

sumptuous new hotel (the "Krantz" where we are to live during the Fall

and Winter) and view it, and we shall go.



Speaking of Mrs. Leiter, there is a noble dame in Vienna, about whom they

retail similar slanders.  She said in French--she is weak in French--that

she had been spending a Sunday afternoon in a gathering of the

"demimonde."  Meaning the unknown land, that mercantile land, that

mysterious half-world which underlies the aristocracy.  But these

Malaproperies are always inventions--they don't happen.



Yes, I wish we could have some talks; I'm full to the eye-lids.  Had a

noble good one with Parker and Dunham--land, but we were grateful for

that visit!

               Yours with all our loves.

                                        MARK.



                      [Inclosed with the foregoing.]



Among the inadequate attempts to account for the assassination we must

concede high rank to the German Emperor's.  He justly describes it as a

"deed unparalleled for ruthlessness," and then adds that it was "ordained

from above."



I think this verdict will not be popular "above."  A man is either a free

agent or he isn't.  If a man is a free agent, this prisoner is

responsible for what he has done; but if a man is not a free agent, if

the deed was ordained from above, there is no rational way of making this

prisoner even partially responsible for it, and the German court cannot

condemn him without manifestly committing a crime.  Logic is logic; and

by disregarding its laws even Emperors as capable and acute as William II

can be beguiled into making charges which should not be ventured upon

except in the shelter of plenty of lightning-rods.

                                                       MARK.





     The end of the year 1898 found Mark Twain once more in easy, even

     luxurious, circumstances.  The hard work and good fortune which had

     enabled him to pay his debts had, in the course of another year,

     provided what was comparative affluence: His report to Howells is

     characteristic and interesting.





                      To W. D. Howells, in New York:



                                   HOTEL KRANTZ, WIEN, L.  NEVER MARKT 6

                                                       Dec.  30, '98.

DEAR HOWELLS,--I begin with a date--including all the details--though I

shall be interrupted presently by a South-African acquaintance who is

passing through, and it may be many days before I catch another leisure

moment.  Note how suddenly a thing can become habit, and how

indestructible the habit is, afterward!  In your house in Cambridge a

hundred years ago, Mrs. Howells said to me, "Here is a bunch of your

letters, and the dates are of no value, because you don't put any in

--the years, anyway."  That remark diseased me with a habit which has cost

me worlds of time and torture and ink, and millions of vain efforts and

buckets of tears to break it, and here it is yet--I could easier get rid

of a virtue.....



I hope it will interest you (for I have no one else who would much care

to know it) that here lately the dread of leaving the children in

difficult circumstances has died down and disappeared and I am now having

peace from that long, long nightmare, and can sleep as well as anyone.

Every little while, for these three years, now, Mrs. Clemens has come

with pencil and paper and figured up the condition of things (she keeps

the accounts and the bank-book) and has proven to me that the clouds were

lifting, and so has hoisted my spirits temporarily and kept me going till

another figuring-up was necessary.  Last night she figured up for her own

satisfaction, not mine, and found that we own a house and furniture in

Hartford; that my English and American copyrights pay an income which

represents a value of $200,000; and that we have $107,000 cash in the

bank.  I have been out and bought a box of 6-cent cigars; I was smoking

4 1/2 centers before.



At the house of an English friend, on Christmas Eve, we saw the

Mouse-Trap played and well played.  I thought the house would kill itself

with laughter.  By George they played with life! and it was most

devastatingly funny.  And it was well they did, for they put us Clemenses

in the front seat, and if they played it poorly I would have assaulted

them.  The head young man and girl were Americans, the other parts were

taken by English, Irish and Scotch girls.  Then there was a

nigger-minstrel show, of the genuine old sort, and I enjoyed that, too,

for the nigger-show was always a passion of mine.  This one was created

and managed by a Quaker doctor from Philada., (23 years old) and he was

the middle man.  There were 9 others--5 Americans from 5 States and a

Scotchman, 2 Englishmen and an Irishman--all post-graduate-medical young

fellows, of course--or, it could be music; but it would be bound to be

one or the other.



It's quite true--I don't read you "as much as I ought," nor anywhere near

half as much as I want to; still I read you all I get a chance to.

I saved up your last story to read when the numbers should be complete,

but before that time arrived some other admirer of yours carried off the

papers.  I will watch admirers of yours when the Silver Wedding journey

begins, and that will not happen again.  The last chance at a bound book

of yours was in London nearly two years ago--the last volume of your

short things, by the Harpers.  I read the whole book twice through and

some of the chapters several times, and the reason that that was as far

as I got with it was that I lent it to another admirer of yours and he is

admiring it yet.  Your admirers have ways of their own; I don't know

where they get them.



Yes, our project is to go home next autumn if we find we can afford to

live in New York.  We've asked a friend to inquire about flats and

expenses.  But perhaps nothing will come of it.  We do afford to live

in the finest hotel in Vienna, and have 4 bedrooms, a dining-room, a

drawing-room, 3 bath-rooms and 3 Vorzimmers, (and food) but we couldn't

get the half of it in New York for the same money ($600 a month).





Susy hovers about us this holiday week, and the shadows fall all about us

of



               "The days when we went gipsying

               A long time ago."



Death is so kind, so benignant, to whom he loves; but he goes by us

others and will not look our way.  We saw the "Master of Palmyra" last

night.  How Death, with the gentleness and majesty, made the human

grand-folk around him seem little and trivial and silly!



With love from all of us to all of you.

                                             MARK.









XXXVIII



LETTERS, 1899, TO HOWELLS AND OTHERS.  VIENNA.  LONDON.  A SUMMER IN

SWEDEN



The beginning of 1899 found the Clemens family still in Vienna, occupying

handsome apartments at the Hotel Krantz.  Their rooms, so often thronged

with gay and distinguished people, were sometimes called the "Second

Embassy."  Clemens himself was the central figure of these assemblies.

Of all the foreign visitors in the Austrian capital he was the most

notable.  Everywhere he was surrounded by a crowd of listeners--his

sayings and opinions were widely quoted.



A project for world disarmament promulgated by the Czar of Russia would

naturally interest Mark Twain, and when William T. Stead, of the Review

of Reviews, cabled him for an opinion on the matter, he sent at first a

brief word and on the same day followed it with more extended comment.

The great war which has since devastated the world gives to this incident

an added interest.





                       To Wm. T. Stead, in London:



No.  1.

                                                       VIENNA, Jan.  9.

DEAR MR.  STEAD,-The Czar is ready to disarm: I am ready to disarm.

Collect the others, it should not be much of a task now.

                                        MARK TWAIN.





To Wm.  T.  Stead, in London:



No.  2.

DEAR MR. STEAD,--Peace by compulsion.  That seems a better idea than the

other.  Peace by persuasion has a pleasant sound, but I think we should

not be able to work it.  We should have to tame the human race first, and

history seems to show that that cannot be done.  Can't we reduce the

armaments little by little--on a pro rata basis--by concert of the

powers?  Can't we get four great powers to agree to reduce their strength

10 per cent a year and thrash the others into doing likewise?  For, of

course, we cannot expect all of the powers to be in their right minds at

one time.  It has been tried.  We are not going to try to get all of them

to go into the scheme peaceably, are we?  In that case I must withdraw my

influence; because, for business reasons, I must preserve the outward

signs of sanity.  Four is enough if they can be securely harnessed

together.  They can compel peace, and peace without compulsion would be

against nature and not operative.  A sliding scale of reduction of 10 per

cent a year has a sort of plausible look, and I am willing to try that if

three other powers will join.  I feel sure that the armaments are now

many times greater than necessary for the requirements of either peace or

war.  Take wartime for instance.  Suppose circumstances made it necessary

for us to fight another Waterloo, and that it would do what it did

before--settle a large question and bring peace.  I will guess that

400,000 men were on hand at Waterloo (I have forgotten the figures).

In five hours they disabled 50,000 men.  It took them that tedious, long

time because the firearms delivered only two or three shots a minute.

But we would do the work now as it was done at Omdurman, with shower

guns, raining 600 balls a minute.  Four men to a gun--is that the number?

A hundred and fifty shots a minute per man.  Thus a modern soldier is 149

Waterloo soldiers in one.  Thus, also, we can now retain one man out of

each 150 in service, disband the others, and fight our Waterloos just as

effectively as we did eighty-five years ago.  We should do the same

beneficent job with 2,800 men now that we did with 400,000 then.  The

allies could take 1,400 of the men, and give Napoleon 1,400 and then whip

him.



But instead what do we see?  In war-time in Germany, Russia and France,

taken together we find about 8 million men equipped for the field.  Each

man represents 149 Waterloo men, in usefulness and killing capacity.

Altogether they constitute about 350 million Waterloo men, and there are

not quite that many grown males of the human race now on this planet.

Thus we have this insane fact--that whereas those three countries could

arm 18,000 men with modern weapons and make them the equals of 3 million

men of Napoleon's day, and accomplish with them all necessary war work,

they waste their money and their prosperity creating forces of their

populations in piling together 349,982,000 extra Waterloo equivalents

which they would have no sort of use for if they would only stop drinking

and sit down and cipher a little.



Perpetual peace we cannot have on any terms, I suppose; but I hope we can

gradually reduce the war strength of Europe till we get it down to where

it ought to be--20,000 men, properly armed.  Then we can have all the

peace that is worth while, and when we want a war anybody can afford it.





                                                  VIENNA, January 9.

P. S.--In the article I sent the figures are wrong--"350 million" ought

to be 450 million; "349,982,000" ought to be 449,982,000, and the remark

about the sum being a little more than the present number of males on the

planet--that is wrong, of course; it represents really one and a half the

existing males.





     Now and then one of Mark Twain's old comrades still reached out to

     him across the years.  He always welcomed such letters--they came as

     from a lost land of romance, recalled always with tenderness.  He

     sent light, chaffing replies, but they were never without an

     undercurrent of affection.





              To Major "Jack" Downing, in Middleport, Ohio:



                              HOTEL KRANTZ, WEIN, I, NEUER MART 6,

                                                  Feb.  26, 1899.

DEAR MAJOR,--No: it was to Bixby that I was apprenticed.  He was to teach

me the river for a certain specified sum.  I have forgotten what it was,

but I paid it.  I steered a trip for Bart Bowen, of Keokuk, on the A. T.

Lacy, and I was partner with Will Bowen on the A. B. Chambers (one trip),

and with Sam Bowen a whole summer on a small Memphis packet.



The newspaper report you sent me is incorrect.  Bixby is not 67: he is

97.  I am 63 myself, and I couldn't talk plain and had just begun to walk

when I apprenticed myself to Bixby who was then passing himself off for

57 and successfully too, for he always looked 60 or 70 years younger than

he really was.  At that time he was piloting the Mississippi on a Potomac

commission granted him by George Washington who was a personal friend of

his before the Revolution.  He has piloted every important river in

America, on that commission, he has also used it as a passport in Russia.

I have never revealed these facts before.  I notice, too, that you are

deceiving the people concerning your age.  The printed portrait which you

have enclosed is not a portrait of you, but a portrait of me when I was

19.  I remember very well when it was common for people to mistake Bixby

for your grandson.  Is it spreading, I wonder--this disposition of pilots

to renew their youth by doubtful methods?  Beck Jolly and Joe Bryan--they

probably go to Sunday school now--but it will not deceive.



Yes, it is as you say.  All of the procession but a fraction has passed.

It is time for us all to fall in.

                         Sincerely yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





                      To W. D. Howells, in New York:



                                   HOTEL KRANTZ, WIEN I.  NEUER MARKT 6

                                                  April 2, '99.

DEAR HOWELLS,--I am waiting for the April Harper, which is about due now;

waiting, and strongly interested.  You are old enough to be a weary man,

with paling interests, but you do not show it.  You do your work in the

same old delicate and delicious and forceful and searching and perfect

way.  I don't know how you can--but I suspect.  I suspect that to you

there is still dignity in human life, and that Man is not a joke--a poor

joke--the poorest that was ever contrived.  Since I wrote my Bible, (last

year)--["What Is Man."]--which Mrs. Clemens loathes, and shudders over,

and will not listen to the last half nor allow me to print any part of

it, Man is not to me the respect-worthy person he was before; and so I

have lost my pride in him, and can't write gaily nor praisefully about

him any more.  And I don't intend to try.  I mean to go on writing, for

that is my best amusement, but I shan't print much.  (for I don't wish to

be scalped, any more than another.)



April 5.  The Harper has come.  I have been in Leipzig with your party,

and then went on to Karlsbad and saw Mrs. Marsh's encounter with the

swine with the toothpick and the other manners--["Their Silver Wedding

Journey."]--At this point Jean carried the magazine away.



Is it imagination, or--Anyway I seem to get furtive and fleeting glimpses

which I take to be the weariness and condolence of age; indifference to

sights and things once brisk with interest; tasteless stale stuff which

used to be champagne; the boredom of travel: the secret sigh behind the

public smile, the private What-in-hell-did-I-come-for!



But maybe that is your art.  Maybe that is what you intend the reader to

detect and think he has made a Columbus-discovery.  Then it is well done,

perfectly done.  I wrote my last travel book--[Following the Equator.]

--in hell; but I let on, the best I could, that it was an excursion

through heaven.  Some day I will read it, and if its lying cheerfulness

fools me, then I shall believe it fooled the reader.  How I did loathe

that journey around the world!--except the sea-part and India.



Evening.  My tail hangs low.  I thought I was a financier--and I bragged

to you.  I am not bragging, now.  The stock which I sold at such a fine

profit early in January, has never ceased to advance, and is now worth

$60,000 more than I sold it for.  I feel just as if I had been spending

$20,000 a month, and I feel reproached for this showy and unbecoming

extravagance.



Last week I was going down with the family to Budapest to lecture, and to

make a speech at a banquet.  Just as I was leaving here I got a telegram

from London asking for the speech for a New York paper.  I (this is

strictly private) sent it.  And then I didn't make that speech, but

another of a quite different character--a speech born of something

which the introducer said.  If that said speech got cabled and printed,

you needn't let on that it was never uttered.



That was a darling night, and those Hungarians were lively people.  We

were there a week and had a great time.  At the banquet I heard their

chief orator make a most graceful and easy and beautiful and delicious

speech--I never heard one that enchanted me more--although I did not

understand a word of it, since it was in Hungarian.  But the art of it!

--it was superlative.



They are wonderful English scholars, these people; my lecture audience

--all Hungarians--understood me perfectly--to judge by the effects.  The

English clergyman told me that in his congregation are 150 young English

women who earn their living teaching their language; and that there are.

others besides these.



For 60 cents a week the telephone reads the morning news to you at home;

gives you the stocks and markets at noon; gives you lessons in 3 foreign

languages during 3 hours; gives you the afternoon telegrams; and at night

the concerts and operas.  Of course even the clerks and seamstresses and

bootblacks and everybody else are subscribers.



(Correction.  Mrs. Clemens says it is 60 cents a month.)



I am renewing my youth.  I made 4 speeches at one banquet here last

Saturday night.  And I've been to a lot of football matches.



Jean has been in here examining the poll for the Immortals ("Literature,"

March 24,) in the hope, I think, that at last she should find me at the

top and you in second place; and if that is her ambition she has suffered

disappointment for the third time--and will never fare any better, I

hope, for you are where you belong, by every right.  She wanted to know

who it is that does the voting, but I was not able to tell her.  Nor when

the election will be completed and decided.



Next Morning.  I have been reading the morning paper.  I do it every

morning--well knowing that I shall find in it the usual depravities and

basenesses and hypocrisies and cruelties that make up civilization, and

cause me to put in the rest of the day pleading for the damnation of the

human race.  I cannot seem to get my prayers answered, yet I do not

despair.



(Escaped from) 5 o'clock tea.  ('sh!) Oh, the American girl in Europe!

Often she is creditable, but sometimes she is just shocking.  This one,

a minute ago--19, fat-face, raspy voice, pert ways, the self-complacency

of God; and with it all a silly laugh (embarrassed) which kept breaking

out through her chatter all along, whereas there was no call for it, for

she said nothing that was funny.  "Spose so many 've told y' how they

'njoyed y'r chapt'r on the Germ' tongue it's bringin' coals to Newcastle

Kehe! say anything 'bout it Ke-hehe!  Spent m' vacation 'n Russia, 'n

saw Tolstoi; he said--" It made me shudder.



April 12.  Jean has been in here with a copy of Literature, complaining

that I am again behind you in the election of the 10 consecrated members;

and seems troubled about it and not quite able to understand it.  But I

have explained to her that you are right there on the ground, inside the

pool-booth, keeping game--and that that makes a large difference in these

things.



13th.  I have been to the Knustausstellung with Mrs. Clemens.  The office

of art seems to be to grovel in the dirt before Emperors and this and

that and the other damned breed of priests.

                                   Yrs ever

                                             MARK.





     Howells and Clemens were corresponding regularly again, though not

     with the frequency of former years.  Perhaps neither of them was

     bubbling over with things to say; perhaps it was becoming yearly

     less attractive to pick up a pen and write, and then, of course,

     there was always the discouragement of distance.  Once Howells

     wrote: "I know this will find you in Austria before I can well turn

     round, but I must make believe you are in Kennebunkport before I can

     begin it."  And in another letter: "It ought to be as pleasant to

     sit down and write to you as to sit down and talk to you, but it

     isn't.....  The only reason why I write is that I want another

     letter from you, and because I have a whole afternoon for the job.

     I have the whole of every afternoon, for I cannot work later than

     lunch.  I am fagged by that time, and Sunday is the only day that

     brings unbearable leisure.  I hope you will be in New York another

     winter; then I shall know what to do with these foretastes of

     eternity."



     Clemens usually wrote at considerable length, for he had a good deal

     to report of his life in the Austrian capital, now drawing to a

     close.





                      To W. D. Howells, in New York:



                                                       May 12, 1899.

DEAR HOWELLS,--7.15 p.  m.  Tea (for Mr. and Mrs. Tower, who are leaving

for Russia) just over; nice people and rather creditable to the human

race: Mr. and Mrs. Tower; the new Minister and his wife; the Secretary of

Legation; the Naval (and Military) Attach; several English ladies; an

Irish lady; a Scotch lady; a particularly nice young Austrian baron who

wasn't invited but came and went supposing it was the usual thing and

wondered at the unusually large gathering; two other Austrians and

several Americans who were also in his fix; the old Baronin Langeman,

the only Austrian invited; the rest were Americans.  It made just a

comfortable crowd in our parlor, with an overflow into Clara's through

the folding doors.  I don't enjoy teas, and am daily spared them by Mrs.

Clemens, but this was a pleasant one.  I had only one accident.  The old

Baronin Langeman is a person I have a strong fondness for, for we

violently disagree on some subjects and as violently agree on others

--for instance, she is temperance and I am not: she has religious beliefs

and feelings and I have none; (she's a Methodist!) she is a democrat and

so am I; she is woman's rights and so am I; she is laborers' rights and

approves trades unions and strikes, and that is me.  And so on.  After

she was gone an English lady whom I greatly like, began to talk sharply

against her for contributing money, time, labor, and public expression of

favor to a strike that is on (for an 11-hour day) in the silk factories

of Bohemia--and she caught me unprepared and betrayed me into over-warm

argument.  I am sorry: for she didn't know anything about the subject,

and I did; and one should be gentle with the ignorant, for they are the

chosen of God.



(The new Minister is a good man, but out of place.  The Sec. of Legation

is a good man, but out of place.  The Attache is a good man, but out of

place.  Our government for displacement beats the new White Star ship;

and her possible is 17,200 tons.)



May 13, 4 p. m.  A beautiful English girl and her handsome English

husband came up and spent the evening, and she certainly is a bird.

English parents--she was born and reared in Roumania and couldn't talk

English till she was 8 or 10.  She came up clothed like the sunset, and

was a delight to look at.  (Roumanian costume.).....



Twenty-four young people have gone out to the Semmering to-day (and

to-morrow) and Mrs. Clemens and an English lady and old Leschetitzky and

his wife have gone to chaperon them.  They gave me a chance to go, but

there are no snow mountains that I want to look at.  Three hours out,

three hours back, and sit up all night watching the young people dance;

yelling conversationally and being yelled at, conversationally, by new

acquaintances, through the deafening music, about how I like Vienna, and

if it's my first visit, and how long we expect to stay, and did I see the

foot-washing, and am I writing a book about Vienna, and so on.  The terms

seemed too severe.  Snow mountains are too dear at the price ....



For several years I have been intending to stop writing for print as

soon as I could afford it.  At last I can afford it, and have put the

pot-boiler pen away.  What I have been wanting is a chance to write a

book without reserves--a book which should take account of no one's

feelings, and no one's prejudices, opinions, beliefs, hopes, illusions,

delusions; a book which should say my say, right out of my heart, in the

plainest language and without a limitation of any sort.  I judged that

that would be an unimaginable luxury, heaven on earth.



It is under way, now, and it is a luxury! an intellectual drunk: Twice I

didn't start it right; and got pretty far in, both times, before I found

it out.  But I am sure it is started right this time.  It is in

tale-form.  I believe I can make it tell what I think of Man, and how he

is constructed, and what a shabby poor ridiculous thing he is, and how

mistaken he is in his estimate of his character and powers and qualities

and his place among the animals.



So far, I think I am succeeding.  I let the madam into the secret day

before yesterday, and locked the doors and read to her the opening

chapters.  She said--



"It is perfectly horrible--and perfectly beautiful!"



"Within the due limits of modesty, that is what I think."



I hope it will take me a year or two to write it, and that it will turn

out to be the right vessel to contain all the abuse I am planning to dump

into it.

                         Yours ever

                                        MARK.





     The story mentioned in the foregoing, in which Mark Twain was to

     give his opinion of man, was The Mysterious Stranger.  It was not

     finished at the time, and its closing chapter was not found until

     after his death.  Six years later (1916) it was published serially

     in Harper's Magazine, and in book form.



     The end of May found the Clemens party in London, where they were

     received and entertained with all the hospitality they had known in

     earlier years.  Clemens was too busy for letter-writing, but in the

     midst of things he took time to report to Howells an amusing

     incident of one of their entertainments.





                      To W. D. Howells, in America:



                                                  LONDON, July 3, '99

DEAR HOWELLS,--..... I've a lot of things to write you, but it's no use

--I can't get time for anything these days.  I must break off and write a

postscript to Canon Wilberforce before I go to bed.  This afternoon he

left a luncheon-party half an hour ahead of the rest, and carried off my

hat (which has Mark Twain in a big hand written in it.) When the rest of

us came out there was but one hat that would go on my head--it fitted

exactly, too.  So wore it away.  It had no name in it, but the Canon was

the only man who was absent.  I wrote him a note at 8 p.m.; saying that

for four hours I had not been able to take anything that did not belong

to me, nor stretch a fact beyond the frontiers of truth, and my family

were getting alarmed.  Could he explain my trouble?  And now at 8.30 p.m.

comes a note from him to say that all the afternoon he has been

exhibiting a wonder-compelling mental vivacity and grace of expression,

etc., etc., and have I missed a hat?  Our letters have crossed.

                              Yours ever

                                             MARK.





     News came of the death of Robert Ingersoll.  Clemens had been always

     one of his most ardent admirers, and a warm personal friend.  To

     Ingersoll's niece he sent a word of heartfelt sympathy.





                    To Miss Eva Farrell, in New York:



                                   30 WELLINGTON COURT, ALBERT GATE.

DEAR MISS FARRELL,--Except my daughter's, I have not grieved for any

death as I have grieved for his.  His was a great and beautiful spirit,

he was a man--all man from his crown to his foot soles.  My reverence for

him was deep and genuine; I prized his affection for me and returned it

with usury.

                    Sincerely Yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     Clemens and family decided to spend the summer in Sweden, at Sauna,

     in order to avail themselves of osteopathic treatment as practised

     by Heinrick Kellgren.  Kellgren's method, known as the "Swedish

     movements," seemed to Mark Twain a wonderful cure for all ailments,

     and he heralded the discovery far and wide.  He wrote to friends far

     and near advising them to try Kellgren for anything they might

     happen to have.  Whatever its beginning, any letter was likely to

     close with some mention of the new panacea.





               To Rev. J. H. Twichell, traveling in Europe:



                                             SANNA, Sept. 6, '99.

DEAR JOE,--I've no business in here--I ought to be outside.  I shall

never see another sunset to begin with it this side of heaven.  Venice?

land, what a poor interest that is!  This is the place to be.  I have

seen about 60 sunsets here; and a good 40 of them were clear and away

beyond anything I had ever imagined before for dainty and exquisite and

marvellous beauty and infinite change and variety.  America?  Italy?  The

tropics?  They have no notion of what a sunset ought to be.  And this

one--this unspeakable wonder!  It discounts all the rest.  It brings the

tears, it is so unutterably beautiful.



If I had time, I would say a word about this curative system here.  The

people actually do several of the great things the Christian Scientists

pretend to do.  You wish to advise with a physician about it?  Certainly.

There is no objection.  He knows next to something about his own trade,

but that will not embarrass him in framing a verdict about this one.

I respect your superstitions--we all have them.  It would be quite

natural for the cautious Chinaman to ask his native priest to instruct

him as to the value of the new religious specialty which the Western

missionary is trying to put on the market, before investing in it.  (He

would get a verdict.)

                         Love to you all!

                                   Always Yours

                                                  MARK.



     Howells wrote that he was going on a reading-tour-dreading it, of

     course-and asking for any advice that Clemens felt qualified to

     give.  Naturally, Clemens gave him the latest he had in stock,

     without realizing, perhaps, that he was recommending an individual

     practice which few would be likely to imitate.  Nevertheless, what

     he says is interesting.





                      To W. D. Howells, in America:



                                        SANNA, SWEDEN, Sept. 26, '99.

DEAR HOWELLS,--Get your lecture by heart--it will pay you.  I learned a

trick in Vienna--by accident--which I wish I had learned years ago.  I

meant to read from a Tauchnitz, because I knew I hadn't well memorized

the pieces; and I came on with the book and read a few sentences, then

remembered that the sketch needed a few words of explanatory

introduction; and so, lowering the book and now and then unconsciously

using it to gesture with, I talked the introduction, and it happened to

carry me into the sketch itself, and then I went on, pretending that I

was merely talking extraneous matter and would come to the sketch

presently.  It was a beautiful success.  I knew the substance of the

sketch and the telling phrases of it; and so, the throwing of the rest of

it into informal talk as I went along limbered it up and gave it the snap

and go and freshness of an impromptu.  I was to read several pieces, and

I played the same game with all of them, and always the audience thought

I was being reminded of outside things and throwing them in, and was

going to hold up the book and begin on the sketch presently--and so I

always got through the sketch before they were entirely sure that it had

begun.  I did the same thing in Budapest and had the same good time over

again.  It's a new dodge, and the best one that was ever invented.  Try

it.  You'll never lose your audience--not even for a moment.  Their

attention is fixed, and never wavers.  And that is not the case where one

reads from book or MS., or where he stands up without a note and frankly

exposes the fact, by his confident manner and smooth phrasing, that he is

not improvising, but reciting from memory.  And in the heat of telling a

thing that is memorised in substance only, one flashes out the happiest

suddenly-begotten phrases every now and then!  Try it.  Such a phrase has

a life and sparkle about it that twice as good a one could not exhibit if

prepared beforehand, and it "fetches" an audience in such an enthusing

and inspiring and uplifting way that that lucky phrase breeds another

one, sure.



Your September instalment--["Their Silver Wedding journey."]--was

delicious--every word of it.  You haven't lost any of your splendid art.

Callers have arrived.

                              With love

                                        MARK.





     "Yes," wrote Howells, "if I were a great histrionic artist like you

     I would get my poor essays by heart, and recite them, but being what

     I am I should do the thing so lifelessly that I had better recognise

     their deadness frankly and read them."



     From Vienna Clemens had contributed to the Cosmopolitan, then owned

     by John Brisben Walker, his first article on Christian Science.  It

     was a delicious bit of humor and found such enthusiastic

     appreciation that Walker was moved to send an additional $200 check

     in payment for it.  This brought prompt acknowledgment.





               To John Brisben Walker, in Irvington, N. Y.:



                                             LONDON, Oct. 19, '99

DEAR MR. WALKER,--By gracious but you have a talent for making a man feel

proud and good!  To say a compliment well is a high art--and few possess

it.  You know how to do it, and when you confirm its sincerity with a

handsome cheque the limit is reached and compliment can no higher go.

I like to work for you: when you don't approve an article you say so,

recognizing that I am not a child and can stand it; and when you approve

an article I don't have to dicker with you as if I raised peanuts and you

kept a stand; I know I shall get every penny the article is worth.



You have given me very great pleasure, and I thank you for it.

                         Sincerely Yours

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     On the same day he sent word to Howells of the good luck which now

     seemed to be coming his way.  The Joan of Arc introduction was the

     same that today appears in his collected works under the title of

     Saint Joan of Arc.





                      To W. D. Howells, in New York:



                                             LONDON, Oct.  19, '99.

DEAR HOWELLS,--My, it's a lucky day!--of the sort when it never rains but

it pours.  I was to write an introduction to a nobler book--the English

translation of the Official Record (unabridged) of the Trials and

Rehabilitation of Joan of Arc, and make a lot of footnotes.  I wrote the

introduction in Sweden, and here a few days ago I tore loose from a tale

I am writing, and took the MS book and went at the grind of note-making

--a fearful job for a man not used to it.  This morning brought a note

from my excellent friend Murray, a rich Englishman who edits the

translation, saying, "Never mind the notes--we'll make the translators

do them."  That was comfort and joy.



The same mail brought a note from Canon Wilberforce, asking me to talk

Joan of Arc in his drawing-room to the Dukes and Earls and M. P.'s

--(which would fetch me out of my seclusion and into print, and I

couldn't have that,) and so of course I must run down to the Abbey and

explain--and lose an hour.  Just then came Murray and said "Leave that to

me--I'll go and do the explaining and put the thing off 3 months; you

write a note and tell him I am coming."



(Which I did, later.)  Wilberforce carried off my hat from a lunch party

last summer, and in to-day's note he said he wouldn't steal my new hat

this time.  In my note I said I couldn't make the drawing-room talk, now

--Murray would explain; and added a P. S.: "You mustn't think it is

because I am afraid to trust my hat in your reach again, for I assure you

upon honor it isn't.  I should bring my old one."



I had suggested to Murray a fortnight ago, that he get some big guns to

write introductory monographs for the book.



Miss X, Joan's Voices and Prophecies.



The Lord Chief Justice of England, the legal prodigies which she

performed before her judges.



Lord Roberts, her military genius.



Kipling, her patriotism.



And so on.  When he came this morning he said he had captured Miss X;

that Lord Roberts and Kipling were going to take hold and see if they

could do monographs worthy of the book.  He hadn't run the others to

cover yet, but was on their track.  Very good news.  It is a grand book,

and is entitled to the best efforts of the best people.  As for me, I

took pains with my Introduction, and I admit that it is no slouch of a

performance.



Then I came down to Chatto's, and found your all too beautiful letter,

and was lifted higher than ever.  Next came letters from America properly

glorifying my Christian Science article in the Cosmopolitan (and one

roundly abusing it,) and a letter from John Brisben Walker enclosing $200

additional pay for the article (he had already paid enough, but I didn't

mention that--which wasn't right of me, for this is the second time he

has done such a thing, whereas Gilder has done it only once and no one

else ever.) I make no prices with Walker and Gilder--I can trust them.



And last of all came a letter from M-.  How I do wish that man was in

hell.  Even-the briefest line from that idiot puts me in a rage.



But on the whole it has been a delightful day, and with M----in hell it

would have been perfect.  But that will happen, and I can wait.



Ah, if I could look into the inside of people as you do, and put it on

paper, and invent things for them to do and say, and tell how they said

it, I could writs a fine and readable book now, for I've got a prime

subject.  I've written 30,000 words of it and satisfied myself that the

stuff is there; so I am going to discard that MS and begin all over again

and have a good time with it.



Oh, I know how you feel!  I've been in hell myself.  You are there

tonight.  By difference in time you are at luncheon, now--and not eating

it.  Nothing is so lonesome as gadding around platforming.  I have

declined 45 lectures to-day-England and Scotland.  I wanted the money,

but not the torture: Good luck to you!--and repentance.

                         With love to all of you

                                             MARK.











LETTERS OF 1900, MAINLY TO TWICHELL.  THE BOER WAR.  BOXER TROUBLES.

THE RETURN TO AMERICA



The New Year found Clemens still in London, chiefly interested in

osteopathy and characteristically glorifying the practice at the expense

of other healing methods.





                  To Rev. J.  H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             LONDON, Jan.  8, 1900.

DEAR JOE,--Mental Telepathy has scored another.  Mental Telegraphy will

be greatly respected a century hence.



By the accident of writing my sister and describing to her the remarkable

cures made by Kellgren with his hands and without drugs, I brought upon

myself a quite stunning surprise; for she wrote to me that she had been

taking this very treatment in Buffalo--and that it was an American

invention.



Well, it does really turn out that Dr. Still, in the middle of Kansas, in

a village, began to experiment in 1874, only five years after Kellgren

began the same work obscurely in the village of Gotha, in Germany.  Dr.

Still seems to be an honest man; therefore I am persuaded that Kellgren

moved him to his experiments by Mental Telegraphy across six hours of

longitude, without need of a wire.  By the time Still began to

experiment, Kellgren had completed his development of the principles of

his system and established himself in a good practice in London--1874

--and was in good shape to convey his discovery to Kansas, Mental

Telegraphically.



Yes, I was greatly surprised to find that my mare's nest was much in

arrears: that this new science was well known in America under the name

of Osteopathy.  Since then, I find that in the past 3 years it has got

itself legalized in 14 States in spite of the opposition of the

physicians; that it has established 20 Osteopathic schools and colleges;

that among its students are 75 allopathic physicians; that there is a

school in Boston and another in Philadelphia, that there are about 100

students in the parent college (Dr. Still's at Kirksville, Missouri,) and

that there are about 2,000 graduates practicing in America.  Dear me,

there are not 30 in Europe.  Europe is so sunk in superstitions and

prejudices that it is an almost impossible thing to get her to do

anything but scoff at a new thing--unless it come from abroad; as witness

the telegraph, dentistry, &c.



Presently the Osteopath will come over here from America and will soon

make himself a power that must be recognized and reckoned with; and then,

25 years from now, England will begin to claim the invention and tell all

about its origin, in the Cyclopedia B-----as in the case of the

telegraph, applied anaesthetics and the other benefactions which she

heaped her abuse upon when her inventors first offered them to her.



I cannot help feeling rather inordinately proud of America for the gay

and hearty way in which she takes hold of any new thing that comes along

and gives it a first rate trial.  Many an ass in America, is getting a

deal of benefit out of X-Science's new exploitation of an age-old healing

principle--faith, combined with the patient's imagination--let it boom

along!  I have no objection.  Let them call it by what name they choose,

so long as it does helpful work among the class which is numerically

vastly the largest bulk of the human race, i.e. the fools, the idiots,

the pudd'nheads.



We do not guess, we know that 9 in 10 of the species are pudd'nheads.

We know it by various evidences; and one of them is, that for ages the

race has respected (and almost venerated) the physician's grotesque

system--the emptying of miscellaneous and harmful drugs into a person's

stomach to remove ailments which in many cases the drugs could not reach

at all; in many cases could reach and help, but only at cost of damage to

some other part of the man; and in the remainder of the cases the drug

either retarded the cure, or the disease was cured by nature in spite of

the nostrums.  The doctor's insane system has not only been permitted to

continue its follies for ages, but has been protected by the State and

made a close monopoly--an infamous thing, a crime against a free-man's

proper right to choose his own assassin or his own method of defending

his body against disease and death.



And yet at the same time, with curious and senile inconsistency, the

State has allowed the man to choose his own assassin--in one detail--the

patent-medicine detail--making itself the protector of that perilous

business, collecting money out of it, and appointing no committee of

experts to examine the medicines and forbid them when extra dangerous.

Really, when a man can prove that he is not a jackass, I think he is in

the way to prove that he is no legitimate member of the race.



I have by me a list of 52 human ailments--common ones--and in this list I

count 19 which the physician's art cannot cure.  But there isn't one

which Osteopathy or Kellgren cannot cure, if the patient comes early.



Fifteen years ago I had a deep reverence for the physician and the

surgeon.  But 6 months of closely watching the Kellgren business has

revolutionized all that, and now I have neither reverence nor respect for

the physician's trade, and scarcely any for the surgeon's,--I am

convinced that of all quackeries, the physician's is the grotesquest and

the silliest.  And they know they are shams and humbugs.  They have taken

the place of those augurs who couldn't look each other in the face

without laughing.



See what a powerful hold our ancient superstitions have upon us: two

weeks ago, when Livy committed an incredible imprudence and by

consequence was promptly stricken down with a heavy triple attack

--influenza, bronchitis, and a lung affected--she recognized the gravity

of the situation, and her old superstitions rose: she thought she ought

to send for a doctor--Think of it--the last man in the world I should

want around at such a time.  Of course I did not say no--not that I was

indisposed to take the responsibility, for I was not, my notion of a

dangerous responsibility being quite the other way--but because it is

unsafe to distress a sick person; I only said we knew no good doctor, and

it could not be good policy to choose at hazard; so she allowed me to

send for Kellgren.  To-day she is up and around--cured.  It is safe to

say that persons hit in the same way at the same time are in bed yet, and

booked to stay there a good while, and to be in a shackly condition and

afraid of their shadows for a couple of years or more to come.



It will be seen by the foregoing that Mark Twain's interest in the

Kellgren system was still an ardent one.  Indeed, for a time he gave most

of his thought to it, and wrote several long appreciations, perhaps with

little idea of publication, but merely to get his enthusiasm physically

expressed.  War, however, presently supplanted medicine--the Boer

troubles in South Africa and the Boxer insurrection in China.  It was a

disturbing, exciting year.





                       To W. D. Howells, in Boston:



                                        WELLINGTON COURT, KNIGHTSBRIDGE,

                                                  Jan. 25, 1900.

DEAR HOWELLS,--If you got half as much as Pond prophesied, be content and

praise God--it has not happened to another.  But I am sorry he didn't go

with you; for it is marvelous to hear him yarn.  He is good company,

cheery and hearty, and his mill is never idle.  Your doing a lecture tour

was heroic.  It was the highest order of grit, and you have a right to be

proud of yourself.  No mount of applause or money or both could save it

from being a hell to a man constituted as you are.  It is that even to

me, who am made of coarser stuff.



I knew the audiences would come forward and shake hands with you--that

one infallible sign of sincere approval.  In all my life, wherever it

failed me I left the hall sick and ashamed, knowing what it meant.



Privately speaking, this is a sordid and criminal war, and in every way

shameful and excuseless.  Every day I write (in my head) bitter magazine

articles about it, but I have to stop with that.  For England must not

fall; it would mean an inundation of Russian and German political

degradations which would envelop the globe and steep it in a sort of

Middle-Age night and slavery which would last till Christ comes again.

Even wrong--and she is wrong--England must be upheld.  He is an enemy of

the human race who shall speak against her now.  Why was the human race

created?  Or at least why wasn't something creditable created in place of

it.  God had his opportunity.  He could have made a reputation.  But no,

He must commit this grotesque folly--a lark which must have cost him a

regret or two when He came to think it over and observe effects.  For a

giddy and unbecoming caprice there has been nothing like it till this

war.  I talk the war with both sides--always waiting until the other man

introduces the topic.  Then I say "My head is with the Briton, but my

heart and such rags of morals as I have are with the Boer--now we will

talk, unembarrassed and without prejudice."  And so we discuss, and have

no trouble.



                                                       Jan.  26.

It was my intention to make some disparaging remarks about the human

race; and so I kept this letter open for that purpose, and for the

purpose of telling my dream, wherein the Trinity were trying to guess a

conundrum, but I can do better--for I can snip out of the "Times" various

samples and side-lights which bring the race down to date, and expose it

as of yesterday.  If you will notice, there is seldom a telegram in a

paper which fails to show up one or more members and beneficiaries of our

Civilization as promenading in his shirt-tail, with the rest of his

regalia in the wash.



I love to see the holy ones air their smug pieties and admire them and

smirk over them, and at the same moment frankly and publicly show their

contempt for the pieties of the Boer--confidently expecting the approval

of the country and the pulpit, and getting it.



I notice that God is on both sides in this war; thus history repeats

itself.  But I am the only person who has noticed this; everybody here

thinks He is playing the game for this side, and for this side only.



               With great love to you all

                                             MARK.





     One cannot help wondering what Mark Twain would have thought of

     human nature had he lived to see the great World War, fought mainly

     by the Christian nations who for nearly two thousand years had been

     preaching peace on earth and goodwill toward men.  But his opinion

     of the race could hardly have been worse than it was.  And nothing

     that human beings could do would have surprised him.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             LONDON, Jan. 27, 1900.

DEAR JOE,--Apparently we are not proposing to set the Filipinos free and

give their islands to them; and apparently we are not proposing to hang

the priests and confiscate their property.  If these things are so, the

war out there has no interest for me.



I have just been examining chapter LXX of "Following the Equator," to see

if the Boer's old military effectiveness is holding out.  It reads

curiously as if it had been written about the present war.



I believe that in the next chapter my notion of the Boer was rightly

conceived.  He is popularly called uncivilized, I do not know why.

Happiness, food, shelter, clothing, wholesale labor, modest and rational

ambitions, honesty, kindliness, hospitality, love of freedom and

limitless courage to fight for it, composure and fortitude in time of

disaster, patience in time of hardship and privation, absence of noise

and brag in time of victory, contentment with a humble and peaceful life

void of insane excitements--if there is a higher and better form of

civilization than this, I am not aware of it and do not know where to

look for it.  I suppose we have the habit of imagining that a lot of

artistic, intellectual and other artificialities must be added, or it

isn't complete.  We and the English have these latter; but as we lack the

great bulk of these others, I think the Boer civilization is the best of

the two.  My idea of our civilization is that it is a shabby poor thing

and full of cruelties, vanities, arrogancies, meannesses, and

hypocrisies.  As for the word, I hate the sound of it, for it conveys a

lie; and as for the thing itself, I wish it was in hell, where it

belongs.



Provided we could get something better in the place of it.  But that is

not possible, perhaps.  Poor as it is, it is better than real savagery,

therefore we must stand by it, extend it, and (in public) praise it.

And so we must not utter any hateful word about England in these days,

nor fail to hope that she will win in this war, for her defeat and fall

would be an irremediable disaster for the mangy human race.... Naturally,

then, I am for England; but she is profoundly in the wrong, Joe, and no

(instructed) Englishman doubts it.  At least that is my belief.



Maybe I managed to make myself misunderstood, as to the Osteopathists.

I wanted to know how the men impress you.  As to their Art, I know fairly

well about that, and should not value Hartford's opinion of it; nor a

physician's; nor that of another who proposed to enlighten me out of his

ignorance.  Opinions based upon theory, superstition and ignorance are

not very precious.



Livy and the others are off for the country for a day or two.

               Love to you all

                                   MARK.





     The next letter affords a pleasant variation.  Without doubt it was

     written on realizing that good nature and enthusiasm had led him

     into indiscretion.  This was always happening to him, and letters

     like this are not infrequent, though generally less entertaining.





                          To Mr. Ann, in London:



                                        WELLINGTON COURT, Feb. 23, '00.

DEAR MR. ANN,--Upon sober second thought, it won't do!--I withdraw that

letter.  Not because I said anything in it which is not true, for I

didn't; but because when I allow my name to be used in forwarding a

stock-scheme I am assuming a certain degree of responsibility as toward

the investor, and I am not willing to do that.  I have another objection,

a purely selfish one: trading upon my name, whether the enterprise scored

a success or a failure would damage me.  I can't afford that; even the

Archbishop of Canterbury couldn't afford it, and he has more character to

spare than I have.  (Ah, a happy thought!  If he would sign the letter

with me that would change the whole complexion of the thing, of course.

I do not know him, yet I would sign any commercial scheme that he would

sign.  As he does not know me, it follows that he would sign anything

that I would sign.  This is unassailable logic--but really that is all

that can be said for it.)



No, I withdraw the letter.  This virgin is pure up to date, and is going

to remain so.

                         Ys sincerely,

                                        S. L. C.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                                  WELLINGTON COURT,

                                             KNIGHTSBRIDGE, Mch. 4, '00.

DEAR JOE,--Henry Robinson's death is a sharp wound to me, and it goes

very deep.  I had a strong affection for him, and I think he had for me.

Every Friday, three-fourths of the year for 16 years he was of the

billiard-party in our house.  When we come home, how shall we have

billiard-nights again--with no Ned Bunce and no Henry Robinson?

I believe I could not endure that.  We must find another use for that

room.  Susy is gone, George is gone, Libby Hamersley, Ned Bunce, Henry

Robinson.  The friends are passing, one by one; our house, where such

warm blood and such dear blood flowed so freely, is become a cemetery.

But not in any repellent sense.  Our dead are welcome there; their life

made it beautiful, their death has hallowed it, we shall have them with

us always, and there will be no parting.



It was a moving address you made over Ward Cheney--that fortunate, youth!

Like Susy, he got out of life all that was worth the living, and got his

great reward before he had crossed the tropic frontier of dreams and

entered the Sahara of fact.  The deep consciousness of Susy's good

fortune is a constant comfort to me.



London is happy-hearted at last.  The British victories have swept the

clouds away and there are no uncheerful faces.  For three months the

private dinner parties (we go to no public ones) have been Lodges of

Sorrow, and just a little depressing sometimes; but now they are smiley

and animated again.  Joe, do you know the Irish gentleman and the Irish

lady, the Scotch gentleman and the Scotch lady?  These are darlings,

every one.  Night before last it was all Irish--24.  One would have to

travel far to match their ease and sociability and animation and sparkle

and absence of shyness and self-consciousness.



It was American in these fine qualities.  This was at Mr. Lecky's.  He is

Irish, you know.  Last night it was Irish again, at Lady Gregory's.  Lord

Roberts is Irish; and Sir William Butler; and Kitchener, I think; and a

disproportion of the other prominent Generals are of Irish and Scotch

breed-keeping up the traditions of Wellington, and Sir Colin Campbell of

the Mutiny.  You will have noticed that in S. A. as in the Mutiny, it is

usually the Irish and the Scotch that are placed in the fore-front of the

battle.  An Irish friend of mine says this is because the Kelts are

idealists, and enthusiasts, with age-old heroisms to emulate and keep

bright before the world; but that the low-class Englishman is dull and

without ideals, fighting bull-doggishly while he has a leader, but losing

his head and going to pieces when his leader falls--not so with the Kelt.

Sir Wm. Butler said "the Kelt is the spear-head of the British lance."

                         Love to you all.

                                             MARK.





     The Henry Robinson mentioned in the foregoing letter was Henry C.

     Robinson, one-time Governor of Connecticut, long a dear and intimate

     friend of the Clemens household.  "Lecky" was W. E. H. Lecky, the

     Irish historian whose History of European Morals had been, for many

     years, one of Mark Twain's favorite books:



     In July the Clemenses left the small apartment at 30 Wellington

     Court and established a summer household a little way out of London,

     at Dollis Hill.  To-day the place has been given to the public under

     the name of Gladstone Park, so called for the reason that in an

     earlier time Gladstone had frequently visited there.  It was a

     beautiful spot, a place of green grass and spreading oaks.  In a

     letter in which Mrs. Clemens wrote to her sister she said: "It is

     simply divinely beautiful and peaceful; the great, old trees are

     beyond everything.  I believe nowhere in the world do you find such

     trees as in England."  Clemens wrote to Twichell:  "From the house

     you can see little but spacious stretches of hay-fields and green

     turf.....  Yet the massed, brick blocks of London are reachable in

     three minutes on a horse.  By rail we can be in the heart of London,

     in Baker Street, in seventeen minutes--by a smart train in five."



     Mail, however, would seem to have been less prompt.





                  To the Editor of the Times, in London:



SIR,--It has often been claimed that the London postal service was

swifter than that of New York, and I have always believed that the claim

was justified.  But a doubt has lately sprung up in my mind.  I live

eight miles from Printing House Square; the Times leaves that point at 4

o'clock in the morning, by mail, and reaches me at 5 in the afternoon,

thus making the trip in thirteen hours.



It is my conviction that in New York we should do it in eleven.



                              C.

DOLLIS HILL, N.  W.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                   DOLLIS HILL HOUSE, KILBURN, N. W.

                                             LONDON, Aug.  12, '00.

DEAR JOE,--The Sages Prof. Fiske and Brander Matthews were out here to

tea a week ago and it was a breath of American air to see them.  We

furnished them a bright day and comfortable weather--and they used it all

up, in their extravagant American way.  Since then we have sat by coal

fires, evenings.



We shall sail for home sometime in October, but shall winter in New York

where we can have an osteopath of good repute to continue the work of

putting this family in proper condition.



Livy and I dined with the Chief Justice a month ago and he was as

well-conditioned as an athlete.



It is all China, now, and my sympathies are with the Chinese.  They have

been villainously dealt with by the sceptred thieves of Europe, and I

hope they will drive all the foreigners out and keep them out for good.

I only wish it; of course I don't really expect it.



Why, hang it, it occurs to me that by the time we reach New York you

Twichells will be invading Europe and once more we shall miss the

connection.  This is thoroughly exasperating.  Aren't we ever going to

meet again?

                    With no end of love from all of us,

                                        MARK.



P. S.  Aug. 18.

DEAR JOE,--It is 7.30 a. m.  I have been waking very early, lately.  If

it occurs once more, it will be habit; then I will submit and adopt it.



This is our day of mourning.  It is four years since Susy died; it is

five years and a month that I saw her alive for the last time-throwing

kisses at us from the railway platform when we started West around the

world.



Sometimes it is a century; sometimes it was yesterday.

                    With love

                                   MARK.





     We discover in the foregoing letter that the long European residence

     was drawing to an end.  More than nine years had passed since the

     closing of the Hartford house--eventful years that had seen failure,

     bereavement, battle with debt, and rehabilitated fortunes.  All the

     family were anxious to get home--Mark Twain most anxious of all.



     They closed Dollis Hill House near the end of September, and put up

     for a brief period at a family hotel, an amusing picture of which

     follows.





                   To J. Y. M.  MacAlister, in London:



                                                            Sep.  1900.

MY DEAR MACALISTER,--We do really start next Saturday.  I meant to sail

earlier, but waited to finish some studies of what are called Family

Hotels.  They are a London specialty, God has not permitted them to exist

elsewhere; they are ramshackle clubs which were dwellings at the time of

the Heptarchy.  Dover and Albemarle Streets are filled with them.  The

once spacious rooms are split up into coops which afford as much

discomfort as can be had anywhere out of jail for any money.  All the

modern inconveniences are furnished, and some that have been obsolete for

a century.  The prices are astonishingly high for what you get.  The

bedrooms are hospitals for incurable furniture.  I find it so in this

one.  They exist upon a tradition; they represent the vanishing home-like

inn of fifty years ago, and are mistaken by foreigners for it.  Some

quite respectable Englishmen still frequent them through inherited habit

and arrested development; many Americans also, through ignorance and

superstition.  The rooms are as interesting as the Tower of London, but

older I think.  Older and dearer.  The lift was a gift of William the

Conqueror, some of the beds are prehistoric.  They represent geological

periods.  Mine is the oldest.  It is formed in strata of Old Red

Sandstone, volcanic tufa, ignis fatuus, and bicarbonate of hornblende,

superimposed upon argillaceous shale, and contains the prints of

prehistoric man.  It is in No. 149.  Thousands of scientists come to see

it.  They consider it holy.  They want to blast out the prints but

cannot.  Dynamite rebounds from it.



Finished studies and sail Saturday in Minnehaha.

                    Yours ever affectionately,

                                             MARK TWAIN.





     They sailed for New York October 6th, and something more than a week

     later America gave them a royal welcome.  The press, far and wide,

     sounded Mark Twain's praises once more; dinners and receptions were

     offered on every hand; editors and lecture agents clamored for him.



     The family settled in the Earlington Hotel during a period of

     house-hunting.  They hoped eventually to return to Hartford, but

     after a brief visit paid by Clemens alone to the old place he wrote:





                     To Sylvester Baxter, in Boston:



                                             NEW YORK, Oct. 26, 1900.

DEAR MR. BAXTER,--It was a great pleasure to me to renew the other days

with you, and there was a pathetic pleasure in seeing Hartford and the

house again; but I realize that if we ever enter the house again to live,

our hearts will break.  I am not sure that we shall ever be strong enough

to endure that strain.

                         Sincerely yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     Mr. and Mrs. Rogers wished to have them in their neighborhood, but

     the houses there were not suitable, or were too expensive.  Through

     Mr. Frank Doubleday they eventually found, at 14 West Tenth Street,

     a large residence handsomely furnished, and this they engaged for

     the winter.  "We were lucky to get this big house furnished," he

     wrote MacAlister in London.  "There was not another one in town

     procurable that would answer us, but this one is all right--space

     enough in it for several families, the rooms all old-fashioned,

     great size."



     The little note that follows shows that Mark Twain had not entirely

     forgotten the days of Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn.





              To a Neighbor on West Tenth Street, New York:



                                                       Nov. 30.

DEAR MADAM,--I know I ought to respect my duty and perform it, but I am

weak and faithless where boys are concerned, and I can't help secretly

approving pretty bad and noisy ones, though I do object to the kind that

ring door-bells.  My family try to get me to stop the boys from holding

conventions on the front steps, but I basely shirk out of it, because I

think the boys enjoy it.



My wife has been complaining to me this evening about the boys on the

front steps and under compulsion I have made some promises.  But I am

very forgetful, now that I am old, and my sense of duty is getting

spongy.

                    Very truly yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.













MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 1901-1906



ARRANGED WITH COMMENT BY ALBERT BIGELOW PAINE







VOLUME V.





XL



LETTERS OF 1901, CHIEFLY TO TWICHELL.  MARK TWAIN AS A REFORMER.

SUMMER AT SARANAC.  ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT McKINLEY



     An editorial in the Louisville Courier-Journal, early in 1901, said:

     "A remarkable transformation, or rather a development, has taken

     place in Mark Twain.  The genial humorist of the earlier day is now

     a reformer of the vigorous kind, a sort of knight errant who does

     not hesitate to break a lance with either Church or State if he

     thinks them interposing on that broad highway over which he believes

     not a part but the whole of mankind has the privilege of passing in

     the onward march of the ages."



     Mark Twain had begun "breaking the lance" very soon after his return

     from Europe.  He did not believe that he could reform the world, but

     at least he need not withhold his protest against those things which

     stirred his wrath.  He began by causing the arrest of a cabman who

     had not only overcharged but insulted him; he continued by writing

     openly against the American policy in the Philippines, the

     missionary propaganda which had resulted in the Chinese uprising and

     massacre, and against Tammany politics.  Not all of his efforts were

     in the line of reform; he had become a sort of general spokesman

     which the public flocked to hear, whatever the subject.  On the

     occasion of a Lincoln Birthday service at Carnegie Hall he was

     chosen to preside, and he was obliged to attend more dinners than

     were good for his health.  His letters of this period were mainly

     written to his old friend Twichell, in Hartford.  Howells, who lived

     in New York, he saw with considerable frequency.



     In the letter which follows the medicine which Twichell was to take

     was Plasmon, an English proprietary remedy in which Mark Twain had

     invested--a panacea for all human ills which osteopathy could not

     reach.





                  To Rev. Joseph Twichell, in Hartford:



                                   14 W. 10TH ST.  Jan.  23, '01.

DEAR JOE,--Certainly.  I used to take it in my coffee, but it settled to

the bottom in the form of mud, and I had to eat it with a spoon; so I

dropped the custom and took my 2 teaspoonfuls in cold milk after

breakfast.  If we were out of milk I shoveled the dry powder into my

mouth and washed it down with water.  The only essential is to get it

down, the method is not important.



No, blame it, I can't go to the Alumni dinner, Joe.  It takes two days,

and I can't spare the time.  Moreover I preside at the Lincoln birthday

celebration in Carnegie Hall Feb. 11 and I must not make two speeches so

close together.  Think of it--two old rebels functioning there--I as

President, and Watterson as Orator of the Day!  Things have changed

somewhat in these 40 years, thank God.



Look here--when you come down you must be our guest--we've got a roomy

room for you, and Livy will make trouble if you go elsewhere.  Come

straight to 14 West 10th.



Jan. 24.  Livy says Amen to that; also, can you give us a day or two's

notice, so the room will be sure to be vacant?



I'm going to stick close to my desk for a month, now, hoping to write a

small book.

               Ys Ever

                         MARK





     The letter which follows is a fair sample of Mark Twain's private

     violence on a subject which, in public print, he could only treat

     effectively by preserving his good humor.  When he found it

     necessary to boil over, as he did, now and then, for relief, he

     always found a willing audience in Twichell.  The mention of his

     "Private Philosophy" refers to 'What Is Man?', privately published

     in 1906; reissued by his publishers in 1916.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             14  W. 10th Jan.  29, '01.

DEAR JOE,--I'm not expecting anything but kicks for scoffing, and am

expecting a diminution of my bread and butter by it, but if Livy will let

me I will have my say.  This nation is like all the others that have been

spewed upon the earth--ready to shout for any cause that will tickle its

vanity or fill its pocket.  What a hell of a heaven it will be, when they

get all these hypocrites assembled there!



I can't understand it!  You are a public guide and teacher, Joe, and are

under a heavy responsibility to men, young and old; if you teach your

people--as you teach me--to hide their opinions when they believe the

flag is being abused and dishonored, lest the utterance do them and a

publisher a damage, how do you answer for it to your conscience?  You are

sorry for me; in the fair way of give and take, I am willing to be a

little sorry for you.



However, I seem to be going counter to my own Private Philosophy--which

Livy won't allow me to publish--because it would destroy me.  But I hope

to see it in print before I die.  I planned it 15 years ago, and wrote it

in '98.  I've often tried to read it to Livy, but she won't have it; it

makes her melancholy.  The truth always has that effect on people.  Would

have, anyway, if they ever got hold of a rag of it--Which they don't.



You are supposing that I am supposing that I am moved by a Large

Patriotism, and that I am distressed because our President has blundered

up to his neck in the Philippine mess; and that I am grieved because this

great big ignorant nation, which doesn't know even the A B C facts of the

Philippine episode, is in disgrace before the sarcastic world--drop that

idea!  I care nothing for the rest--I am only distressed and troubled

because I am befouled by these things.  That is all.  When I search

myself away down deep, I find this out.  Whatever a man feels or thinks

or does, there is never any but one reason for it--and that is a selfish

one.



At great inconvenience, and expense of precious time I went to the chief

synagogue the other night and talked in the interest of a charity school

of poor Jew girls.  I know--to the finest, shades--the selfish ends that

moved me; but no one else suspects.  I could give you the details if I

had time.  You would perceive how true they are.



I've written another article; you better hurry down and help Livy squelch

it.



She's out pottering around somewhere, poor housekeeping slave; and Clara

is in the hands of the osteopath, getting the bronchitis pulled and

hauled out of her.  It was a bad attack, and a little disquieting.  It

came day before yesterday, and she hasn't sat up till this afternoon.

She is getting along satisfactorily, now.

                    Lots of love to you all.

                                             MARK





     Mark Twain's religion had to do chiefly with humanity in its present

     incarnation, and concerned itself very little with any possible

     measure of reward or punishment in some supposed court of the

     hereafter.  Nevertheless, psychic investigation always interested

     him, and he was good-naturedly willing to explore, even hoping,

     perhaps, to be convinced that individuality continues beyond death.

     The letter which follows indicates his customary attitude in

     relation to spiritualistic research.  The experiments here

     mentioned, however, were not satisfactory.





                        To Mrs. Charles McQuiston:



                                                  DOBBS FERRY, N. Y.

                                                       March 26, 1901.

DEAR MRS. McQUISTON,--I have never had an experience which moved me to

believe the living can communicate with the dead, but my wife and I have

experimented in the matter when opportunity offered and shall continue to

do so.



I enclose a letter which came this morning--the second from the same

source.  Mrs. K----is a Missourian, and lately she discovered, by

accident, that she was a remarkable hypnotiser.  Her best subject is a

Missouri girl, Miss White, who is to come here soon and sustain strictly

scientific tests before professors at Columbia University.  Mrs. Clemens

and I intend to be present.  And we shall ask the pair to come to our

house to do whatever things they can do.  Meantime, if you thought well

of it, you might write her and arrange a meeting, telling her it is by my

suggestion and that I gave you her address.



Someone has told me that Mrs. Piper is discredited.  I cannot be sure,

but I think it was Mr. Myers, President of the London Psychical Research

Society--we heard of his death yesterday.  He was a spiritualist.  I am

afraid he was a very easily convinced man.  We visited two mediums whom

he and Andrew Lang considered quite wonderful, but they were quite

transparent frauds.



Mrs. Clemens corrects me: One of those women was a fraud, the other not a

fraud, but only an innocent, well-meaning, driveling vacancy.

                         Sincerely yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     In Mark Twain's Bermuda chapters entitled Idle Notes of an Idle

     Excursion he tells of an old sea captain, one Hurricane Jones, who

     explained biblical miracles in a practical, even if somewhat

     startling, fashion.  In his story of the prophets of Baal, for

     instance, the old captain declared that the burning water was

     nothing more nor less than petroleum.  Upon reading the "notes,"

     Professor Phelps of Yale wrote that the same method of explaining

     miracles had been offered by Sir Thomas Browne.



     Perhaps it may be added that Captain Hurricane Jones also appears in

     Roughing It, as Captain Ned Blakely.





                    To Professor William Lyon Phelps;



                                                  YALE UNIVERSITY,

                                             NEW YORK, April 24, 1901.

MY DEAR SIR,--I was not aware that old Sir Thomas had anticipated that

story, and I am much obliged to you for furnishing me the paragraph.

t is curious that the same idea should leave entered two heads so unlike

as the head of that wise old philosopher and that of Captain Ned Wakeman,

a splendidly uncultured old sailor, but in his own opinion a thinker by

divine right.  He was an old friend of mine of many years' standing;

I made two or three voyages with him, and found him a darling in many

ways.  The petroleum story was not told to me; he told it to Joe

Twichell, who ran across him by accident on a sea voyage where I think

the two were the only passengers.  A delicious pair, and admirably mated,

they took to each other at once and became as thick as thieves.  Joe was

passing under a fictitious name, and old Wakeman didn't suspect that he

was a parson; so he gave his profanity full swing, and he was a master of

that great art.  You probably know Twichell, and will know that that is a

kind of refreshment which he is very capable of enjoying.

                    Sincerely yours,

                              S. L. CLEMENS.





     For the summer Clemens and his family found a comfortable lodge in

     the Adirondacks--a log cabin called "The Lair"--on Saranac Lake.

     Soon after his arrival there he received an invitation to attend the

     celebration of Missouri's eightieth anniversary.  He sent the

     following letter:





                   To Edward L. Dimmitt, in St. Louis:



                              AMONG THE ADIRONDACK LAKES, July 19, 1901.

DEAR MR. DIMMITT,--By an error in the plans, things go wrong end first in

this world, and much precious time is lost and matters of urgent

importance are fatally retarded.  Invitations which a brisk young fellow

should get, and which would transport him with joy, are delayed and

impeded and obstructed until they are fifty years overdue when they reach

him.



It has happened again in this case.



When I was a boy in Missouri I was always on the lookout for invitations

but they always miscarried and went wandering through the aisles of time;

and now they are arriving when I am old and rheumatic and can't travel

and must lose my chance.



I have lost a world of delight through this matter of delaying

invitations.  Fifty years ago I would have gone eagerly across the world

to help celebrate anything that might turn up.  IT would have made no

difference to me what it was, so that I was there and allowed a chance to

make a noise.



The whole scheme of things is turned wrong end to.  Life should begin

with age and its privileges and accumulations, and end with youth and its

capacity to splendidly enjoy such advantages.  As things are now, when in

youth a dollar would bring a hundred pleasures, you can't have it.  When

you are old, you get it and there is nothing worth buying with it then.



It's an epitome of life.  The first half of it consists of the capacity

to enjoy without the chance; the last half consists of the chance without

the capacity.



I am admonished in many ways that time is pushing me inexorably along.

I am approaching the threshold of age; in 1977 I shall be 142.  This is

no time to be flitting about the earth.  I must cease from the activities

proper to youth and begin to take on the dignities and gravities and

inertia proper to that season of honorable senility which is on its way

and imminent as indicated above.



Yours is a great and memorable occasion, and as a son of Missouri I

should hold it a high privilege to be there and share your just pride in

the state's achievements; but I must deny myself the indulgence, while

thanking you earnestly for the prized honor you have done me in asking me

to be present.

                    Very truly yours,

                              S. L. CLEMENS.





     In the foregoing Mark Twain touches upon one of his favorite

     fancies: that life should begin with old age and approach strong

     manhood, golden youth, to end at last with pampered and beloved

     babyhood.  Possibly he contemplated writing a story with this idea

     as the theme, but He seems never to have done so.



     The reader who has followed these letters may remember Yung Wing,

     who had charge of the Chinese educational mission in Hartford, and

     how Mark Twain, with Twichell, called on General Grant in behalf of

     the mission.  Yung Wing, now returned to China, had conceived the

     idea of making an appeal to the Government of the United States for

     relief of his starving countrymen.





                     To J. H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



                                        AMPERSAND, N. Y., July 28, '01.

DEAR JOE,--As you say, it is impracticable--in my case, certainly.  For

me to assist in an appeal to that Congress of land-thieves and liars

would be to bring derision upon it; and for me to assist in an appeal for

cash to pass through the hands of those missionaries out there, of any

denomination, Catholic or Protestant, wouldn't do at all.  They wouldn't

handle money which I had soiled, and I wouldn't trust them with it,

anyway.  They would devote it to the relief of suffering--I know

that--but the sufferers selected would be converts.  The

missionary-utterances exhibit no humane feeling toward the others, but in

place of it a spirit of hate and hostility.  And it is natural; the Bible

forbids their presence there, their trade is unlawful, why shouldn't

their characters be of necessity in harmony with--but never mind, let it

go, it irritates me.



Later....  I have been reading Yung Wing's letter again.  It may be that

he is over-wrought by his sympathies, but it may not be so.  There may be

other reasons why the missionaries are silent about the Shensi-2-year

famine and cannibalism.  It may be that there are so few Protestant

converts there that the missionaries are able to take care of them.  That

they are not likely to largely concern themselves about Catholic converts

and the others, is quite natural, I think.



That crude way of appealing to this Government for help in a cause which

has no money in it, and no politics, rises before me again in all its

admirable innocence!  Doesn't Yung Wing know us yet?  However, he has

been absent since '96 or '97.  We have gone to hell since then.  Kossuth

couldn't raise 30 cents in Congress, now, if he were back with his moving

Magyar-Tale.



I am on the front porch (lower one--main deck) of our little bijou of a

dwelling-house.  The lake-edge (Lower Saranac) is so nearly under me that

I can't see the shore, but only the water, small-pored with

rain-splashes--for there is a heavy down-pour.  It is charmingly like

sitting snuggled up on a ship's deck with the stretching sea all around

--but very much more satisfactory, for at sea a rain-storm is depressing,

while here of course the effect engendered is just a deep sense of

comfort and contentment.  The heavy forest shuts us solidly in on three

sides there are no neighbors.  There are beautiful little tan-colored

impudent squirrels about.  They take tea, 5 p. m., (not invited) at the

table in the woods where Jean does my typewriting, and one of them has

been brave enough to sit upon Jean's knee with his tail curved over his

back and munch his food.  They come to dinner, 7 p. m., on the front

porch (not invited).  They all have the one name--Blennerhasset, from

Burr's friend--and none of them answers to it except when hungry.



We have been here since June 21st.  For a little while we had some warm

days--according to the family's estimate; I was hardly discommoded

myself.  Otherwise the weather has been of the sort you are familiar with

in these regions: cool days and cool nights.  We have heard of the hot

wave every Wednesday, per the weekly paper--we allow no dailies to

intrude.  Last week through visitors also--the only ones we have had

--Dr. Root and John Howells.



We have the daily lake-swim; and all the tribe, servants included (but

not I) do a good deal of boating; sometimes with the guide, sometimes

without him--Jean and Clara are competent with the oars.  If we live

another year, I hope we shall spend its summer in this house.



We have taken the Appleton country seat, overlooking the Hudson, at

Riverdale, 25 minutes from the Grand Central Station, for a year,

beginning Oct. 1, with option for another year.  We are obliged to be

close to New York for a year or two.



Aug. 3rd.  I go yachting a fortnight up north in a 20-knot boat 225 feet

long, with the owner, (Mr. Rogers), Tom Reid, Dr. Rice, Col. A. G. Paine

and one or two others.  Judge Howland would go, but can't get away from

engagements; Professor Sloane would go, but is in the grip of an illness.

Come--will you go?  If you can manage it, drop a post-card to me c/o H.H.

Rogers, 26 Broadway.  I shall be in New York a couple of days before we

sail--July 31 or Aug. 1, perhaps the latter,--and I think I shall stop at

the Hotel Grosvenor, cor. 10th St and 5th ave.



We all send you and the Harmonies lots and gobs of love.

                                                            MARK





                  To Rev. J. H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             AMPERSAND, N. Y., Aug. 28.

DEAR JOE,--Just a word, to scoff at you, with your extravagant suggestion

that I read the biography of Phillips Brooks--the very dullest book that

has been printed for a century.  Joe, ten pages of Mrs. Cheney's masterly

biography of her fathers--no, five pages of it--contain more meat, more

sense, more literature, more brilliancy, than that whole basketful of

drowsy rubbish put together.  Why, in that dead atmosphere even Brooks

himself is dull--he wearied me; oh how he wearied me!



We had a noble good time in the Yacht, and caught a Chinese missionary

and drowned him.

                    Love from us all to you all.

                                                  MARK.





     The assassination of President McKinley occurred September 6, 1901.

     Such an event would naturally stir Mark Twain to comment on human

     nature in general.  His letter to Twichell is as individual as it is

     sound in philosophy.  At what period of his own life, or under what

     circumstances, he made the long journey with tragic intent there is

     no means of knowing now.  There is no other mention of it elsewhere

     in the records that survive him.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                   AMPERSAND, Tuesday, (Sept. 10, 1901)

DEAR JOE,--It is another off day, but tomorrow I shall resume work to a

certainty, and bid a long farewell to letter-scribbling.



The news of the President looks decidedly hopeful, and we are all glad,

and the household faces are much improved, as to cheerfulness.  Oh, the

talk in the newspapers!  Evidently the Human Race is the same old Human

Race.  And how unjust, and unreflectingly discriminating, the talkers

are.  Under the unsettling effects of powerful emotion the talkers are

saying wild things, crazy things--they are out of themselves, and do not

know it; they are temporarily insane, yet with one voice they declare

the assassin sane--a man who has been entertaining fiery and reason

--debauching maggots in his head for weeks and months.  Why, no one is

sane, straight along, year in and year out, and we all know it.  Our

insanities are of varying sorts, and express themselves in varying forms

--fortunately harmless forms as a rule--but in whatever form they occur

an immense upheaval of feeling can at any time topple us distinctly over

the sanity-line for a little while; and then if our form happens to be of

the murderous kind we must look out--and so must the spectator.



This ass with the unpronounceable name was probably more insane than

usual this week or two back, and may get back upon his bearings by and

by, but he was over the sanity-border when he shot the President.  It is

possible that it has taken him the whole interval since the murder of the

King of Italy to get insane enough to attempt the President's life.

Without a doubt some thousands of men have been meditating the same act

in the same interval, but new and strong interests have intervened and

diverted their over-excited minds long enough to give them a chance to

settle, and tranquilize, and get back upon a healthy level again.  Every

extraordinary occurrence unsettles the heads of hundreds of thousands of

men for a few moments or hours or days.  If there had been ten kings

around when Humbert fell they would have been in great peril for a day or

more--and from men in whose presence they would have been quite safe

after the excess of their excitement had had an interval in which to cool

down.  I bought a revolver once and travelled twelve hundred miles to

kill a man.  He was away.  He was gone a day.  With nothing else to do,

I had to stop and think--and did.  Within an hour--within half of it

--I was ashamed of myself--and felt unspeakably ridiculous.  I do not

know what to call it if I was not insane.  During a whole week my head

was in a turmoil night and day fierce enough and exhausting enough to

upset a stronger reason than mine.



All over the world, every day, there are some millions of men in that

condition temporarily.  And in that time there is always a moment

--perhaps only a single one when they would do murder if their man was at

hand.  If the opportunity comes a shade too late, the chances are that it

has come permanently too late.  Opportunity seldom comes exactly at the

supreme moment.  This saves a million lives a day in the world--for sure.



No Ruler is ever slain but the tremendous details of it are ravenously

devoured by a hundred thousand men whose minds dwell, unaware, near the

temporary-insanity frontier--and over they go, now!  There is a day--two

days--three--during which no Ruler would be safe from perhaps the half of

them; and there is a single moment wherein he would not be safe from any

of them, no doubt.



It may take this present shooting-case six months to breed another

ruler-tragedy, but it will breed it.  There is at least one mind

somewhere which will brood, and wear, and decay itself to the

killing-point and produce that tragedy.



Every negro burned at the stake unsettles the excitable brain of another

one--I mean the inflaming details of his crime, and the lurid

theatricality of his exit do it--and the duplicate crime follows; and

that begets a repetition, and that one another one and so on.  Every

lynching-account unsettles the brains of another set of excitable white

men, and lights another pyre--115 lynchings last year, 102 inside of 8

months this year; in ten years this will be habit, on these terms.



Yes, the wild talk you see in the papers!  And from men who are sane when

not upset by overwhelming excitement.  A U. S. Senator-Cullom--wants this

Buffalo criminal lynched!  It would breed other lynchings--of men who are

not dreaming of committing murders, now, and will commit none if Cullom

will keep quiet and not provide the exciting cause.



And a District Attorney wants a law which shall punish with death

attempts upon a President's life--this, mind you, as a deterrent.

It would have no effect--or the opposite one.  The lunatic's mind-space

is all occupied--as mine was--with the matter in hand; there is no room

in it for reflections upon what may happen to him.  That comes after the

crime.



It is the noise the attempt would make in the world that would breed the

subsequent attempts, by unsettling the rickety minds of men who envy the

criminal his vast notoriety--his obscure name tongued by stupendous Kings

and Emperors--his picture printed everywhere, the trivialest details of

his movements, what he eats, what he drinks; how he sleeps, what he says,

cabled abroad over the whole globe at cost of fifty thousand dollars a

day--and he only a lowly shoemaker yesterday!--like the assassin of the

President of France--in debt three francs to his landlady, and insulted

by her--and to-day she is proud to be able to say she knew him

"as familiarly as you know your own brother," and glad to stand till she

drops and pour out columns and pages of her grandeur and her happiness

upon the eager interviewer.



Nothing will check the lynchings and ruler-murder but absolute silence

--the absence of pow-pow about them.  How are you going to manage that?

By gagging every witness and jamming him into a dungeon for life; by

abolishing all newspapers; by exterminating all newspaper men; and by

extinguishing God's most elegant invention, the Human Race.  It is quite

simple, quite easy, and I hope you will take a day off and attend to it,

Joe.  I blow a kiss to you, and am

                                   Lovingly Yours,

                                                  MARK.





     When the Adirondack summer ended Clemens settled for the winter in

     the beautiful Appleton home at Riverdale-on-the-Hudson.  It was a

     place of wide-spreading grass and shade-a house of ample room.  They

     were established in it in time for Mark Twain to take an active

     interest in the New York elections and assist a ticket for good

     government to defeat Tammany Hall.









XLI



LETTERS OF 1902.  RIVERDALE.  YORK HARBOR.  ILLNESS OF MRS.  CLEMENS



The year 1902 was an eventful one for Mark Twain.  In April he received a

degree of LL.D.  from the University of Missouri and returned to his

native State to accept it.  This was his last journey to the Mississippi

River.  During the summer Mrs. Clemens's health broke down and illnesses

of one sort or another visited other members of the family.  Amid so much

stress and anxiety Clemens had little time or inclination for work.  He

wrote not many letters and mainly somber ones.  Once, by way of

diversion, he worked out the idea of a curious club--which he formed--its

members to be young girls--girls for the most part whom he had never

seen.  They were elected without their consent from among those who wrote

to him without his consent, and it is not likely that any one so chosen

declined membership.  One selection from his letters to the French

member, Miss Helene Picard, of St.-Die, France, will explain the club and

present a side of Mask Twain somewhat different from that found in most

of his correspondence.





                   To Miss Picard, in St.-Die, France:



                              RIVERDALE-ON-THE-HUDSON, February 22, 1902.

DEAR MISS HELENE,--If you will let me call you so, considering that my

head is white and that I have grownup daughters.  Your beautiful letter

has given me such deep pleasure!  I will make bold to claim you for a

friend and lock you up with the rest of my riches; for I am a miser who

counts his spoil every day and hoards it secretly and adds to it when he

can, and is grateful to see it grow.



Some of that gold comes, like yourself, in a sealed package, and I can't

see it and may never have the happiness; but I know its value without

that, and by what sum it increases my wealth.



I have a Club, a private Club, which is all my own.  I appoint the

Members myself, and they can't help themselves, because I don't allow

them to vote on their own appointment and I don't allow them to resign!

They are all friends whom I have never seen (save one), but who have

written friendly letters to me.



By the laws of my Club there can be only one Member in each country, and

there can be no male Member but myself.  Some day I may admit males, but

I don't know--they are capricious and inharmonious, and their ways

provoke me a good deal.  It is a matter which the Club shall decide.



I have made four appointments in the past three or four months: You as

Member for France, a young Highland girl as Member for Scotland, a

Mohammedan girl as Member for Bengal, and a dear and bright young niece

of mine as Member for the United States--for I do not represent a country

myself, but am merely Member at Large for the Human Race.



You must not try to resign, for the laws of the Club do not allow that.

You must console yourself by remembering that you are in the best of

company; that nobody knows of your membership except myself--that no

Member knows another's name, but only her country; that no taxes are

levied and no meetings held (but how dearly I should like to attend

one!).



One of my Members is a Princess of a royal house, another is the daughter

of a village book-seller on the continent of Europe.  For the only

qualification for Membership is intellect and the spirit of good will;

other distinctions, hereditary or acquired, do not count.



May I send you the Constitution and Laws of the Club?  I shall be so

pleased if I may.  It is a document which one of my daughters typewrites

for me when I need one for a new Member, and she would give her eyebrows

to know what it is all about, but I strangle her curiosity by saying:

"There are much cheaper typewriters than you are, my dear, and if you try

to pry into the sacred mysteries of this Club one of your prosperities

will perish sure."



My favorite?  It is "Joan of Arc."  My next is "Huckleberry Finn," but

the family's next is "The Prince and the Pauper."  (Yes, you are right

--I am a moralist in disguise; it gets me into heaps of trouble when I

go thrashing around in political questions.)



I wish you every good fortune and happiness and I thank you so much for

your letter.

                    Sincerely yours,

                              S. L. CLEMENS.





     Early in the year Clemens paid a visit to Twichell in Hartford, and

     after one of their regular arguments on theology and the moral

     accountability of the human race, arguments that had been going on

     between them for more than thirty years--Twichell lent his visitor

     Freedom of the Will, by Jonathan Edwards, to read on the way home.

     The next letter was the result.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             RIVERDALE-ON-THE-HUDSON.

                                                       Feb. '02.

DEAR JOE,--"After compliments."--[Meaning "What a good time you gave me;

what a happiness it was to be under your roof again; etc., etc."  See

opening sentence of all translations of letters passing between Lord

Roberts and Indian princes and rulers.]--From Bridgeport to New York;

thence to home; and continuously until near midnight I wallowed and

reeked with Jonathan in his insane debauch; rose immediately refreshed

and fine at 10 this morning, but with a strange and haunting sense of

having been on a three days' tear with a drunken lunatic.  It is years

since I have known these sensations.  All through the book is the glaze

of a resplendent intellect gone mad--a marvelous spectacle.  No, not all

through the book--the drunk does not come on till the last third, where

what I take to be Calvinism and its God begins to show up and shine red

and hideous in the glow from the fires of hell, their only right and

proper adornment.  By God I was ashamed to be in such company.



Jonathan seems to hold (as against the Arminian position) that the Man

(or his Soul or his Will) never creates an impulse itself, but is moved

to action by an impulse back of it.  That's sound!



Also, that of two or more things offered it, it infallibly chooses the

one which for the moment is most pleasing to ITSELF.  Perfectly correct!

An immense admission for a man not otherwise sane.



Up to that point he could have written chapters III and IV of my

suppressed "Gospel."  But there we seem to separate.  He seems to concede

the indisputable and unshakable dominion of Motive and Necessity (call

them what he may, these are exterior forces and not under the man's

authority, guidance or even suggestion)--then he suddenly flies the logic

track and (to all seeming) makes the man and not these exterior forces

responsible to God for the man's thoughts, words and acts.  It is frank

insanity.



I think that when he concedes the autocratic dominion of Motive and

Necessity he grants, a third position of mine--that a man's mind is a

mere machine--an automatic machine--which is handled entirely from the

outside, the man himself furnishing it absolutely nothing: not an ounce

of its fuel, and not so much as a bare suggestion to that exterior

engineer as to what the machine shall do, nor how it shall do it nor

when.



After that concession, it was time for him to get alarmed and shirk--for

he was pointing straight for the only rational and possible next-station

on that piece of road the irresponsibility of man to God.



And so he shirked.  Shirked, and arrived at this handsome result:



Man is commanded to do so-and-so.  It has been ordained from the

beginning of time that some men shan't and others can't.



These are to be blamed: let them be damned.



I enjoy the Colonel very much, and shall enjoy the rest of him with an

obscene delight.

               Joe, the whole tribe shout love to you and yours!

                                                       MARK.





     We have not heard of Joe Goodman since the trying days of '90 and

     '91, when he was seeking to promote the fortunes of the type-setting

     machine.  Goodman, meantime, who had in turn been miner, printer,

     publisher, and farmer; had been devoting his energies and genius to

     something entirely new: he had been translating the prehistoric

     Mayan inscriptions of Yucatan, and with such success that his work

     was elaborately published by an association of British scientists.

     In due time a copy of this publication came to Clemens, who was full

     of admiration of the great achievement.





                     To J. T. Goodman, in California:



                                        RIVERDALE-ON-THE-HUDSON,

                                                  June 13, '02.

DEAR JOE,--I am lost in reverence and admiration!  It is now twenty-four

hours that I have been trying to cool down and contemplate with quiet

blood this extraordinary spectacle of energy, industry, perseverance,

pluck, analytical genius, penetration, this irruption of thunders and

fiery splendors from a fair and flowery mountain that nobody had supposed

was a sleeping volcano, but I seem to be as excited as ever.  Yesterday

I read as much as half of the book, not understanding a word but

enchanted nevertheless--partly by the wonder of it all, the study, the

erudition, the incredible labor, the modesty, the dignity, the majestic

exclusiveness of the field and its lofty remoteness from things and

contacts sordid and mean and earthy, and partly by the grace and beauty

and limpidity of the book's unsurpassable English.  Science, always great

and worshipful, goes often in hodden grey, but you have clothed her in

garments meet for her high degree.



You think you get "poor pay" for your twenty years?  No, oh no.  You have

lived in a paradise of the intellect whose lightest joys were beyond the

reach of the longest purse in Christendom, you have had daily and nightly

emancipation from the world's slaveries and gross interests, you have

received a bigger wage than any man in the land, you have dreamed a

splendid dream and had it come true, and to-day you could not afford to

trade fortunes with anybody--not even with another scientist, for he must

divide his spoil with his guild, whereas essentially the world you have

discovered is your own and must remain so.



It is all just magnificent, Joe!  And no one is prouder or gladder than

               Yours always

                              MARK.





     At York Harbor, Maine, where they had taken a cottage for the

     summer--a pretty place, with Howells not far distant, at Kittery

     Point--Mrs. Clemens's health gave way.  This was at a period when

     telegraphic communication was far from reliable.  The old-time

     Western Union had fallen from grace; its "system" no longer

     justified the best significance of that word.  The new day of

     reorganization was coming, and it was time for it.  Mark Twain's

     letter concerning the service at York Harbor would hardly be

     warranted today, but those who remember conditions of that earlier

     time will agree that it was justified then, and will appreciate its

     satire.





           To the President of The Western Union, in New York:



                                             "THE PINES"

                                        YORK HARBOR, MAINE.

DEAR SIR,--I desire to make a complaint, and I bring it to you, the head

of the company, because by experience I know better than to carry it to a

subordinate.



I have been here a month and a half, and by testimony of friends,

reinforced by personal experience I now feel qualified to claim as an

established fact that the telegraphic service here is the worst in the

world except that Boston.



These services are actually slower than was the New York and Hartford

service in the days when I last complained to you--which was fifteen or

eighteen years ago, when telegraphic time and train time between the

mentioned points was exactly the same, to-wit, three hours and a half.

Six days ago--it was that raw day which provoked so much comment--my

daughter was on her way up from New York, and at noon she telegraphed me

from New Haven asking that I meet her with a cloak at Portsmouth.  Her

telegram reached me four hours and a quarter later--just 15 minutes too

late for me to catch my train and meet her.



I judge that the telegram traveled about 200 miles.  It is the best

telegraphic work I have seen since I have been here, and I am mentioning

it in this place not as a complaint but as a compliment.  I think a

compliment ought always to precede a complaint, where one is possible,

because it softens resentment and insures for the complaint a courteous

and gentle reception.



Still, there is a detail or two connected with this matter which ought

perhaps to be mentioned.  And now, having smoothed the way with the

compliment, I will venture them.  The head corpse in the York Harbor

office sent me that telegram altho (1) he knew it would reach me too late

to be of any value; (2) also, that he was going to send it to me by his

boy; (3) that the boy would not take the trolley and come the 2 miles in

12 minutes, but would walk; (4) that he would be two hours and a quarter

on the road; (5) and that he would collect 25 cents for transportation,

for a telegram which the he knew to be worthless before he started it.

From these data I infer that the Western Union owes me 75 cents; that is

to say, the amount paid for combined wire and land transportation

--a recoup provided for in the printed paragraph which heads the

telegraph-blank.



By these humane and Christian stages we now arrive at the complaint

proper.  We have had a grave case of illness in the family, and a

relative was coming some six hundred miles to help in the sick-room

during the convalescing period.  It was an anxious time, of course,

and I wrote and asked to be notified as to the hour of the expected

arrival of this relative in Boston or in York Harbor.  Being afraid of

the telegraph--which I think ought not to be used in times of hurry and

emergency--I asked that the desired message be brought to me by some

swift method of transportation.  By the milkman, if he was coming this

way.  But there are always people who think they know more than you do,

especially young people; so of course the young fellow in charge of this

lady used the telegraph.  And at Boston, of all places!  Except York

Harbor.



The result was as usual; let me employ a statelier and exacter term, and

say, historical.



The dispatch was handed to the h. c. of the Boston office at 9 this

morning.  It said, "Shall bring A. S. to you eleven forty-five this

morning."  The distance traveled by the dispatch is forty or fifty miles,

I suppose, as the train-time is five minutes short of two hours, and the

trains are so slow that they can't give a W. U. telegram two hours and

twenty minutes start and overtake it.



As I have said, the dispatch was handed in at Boston at 9.  The expected

visitors left Boston at 9.40, and reached my house at 12 noon, beating

the telegram 2 solid hours, and 5 minutes over.



The boy brought the telegram.  It was bald-headed with age, but still

legible.  The boy was prostrate with travel and exposure, but still

alive, and I went out to condole with him and get his last wishes and

send for the ambulance.  He was waiting to collect transportation before

turning his passing spirit to less serious affairs.  I found him

strangely intelligent, considering his condition and where he is getting

his training.  I asked him at what hour the telegram was handed to the

h. c. in Boston.  He answered brightly, that he didn't know.



I examined the blank, and sure enough the wary Boston h. c.  had

thoughtfully concealed that statistic.  I asked him at what hour it had

started from Boston.  He answered up as brightly as ever, and said he

didn't know.



I examined the blank, and sure enough the Boston h. c. had left that

statistic out in the cold, too.  In fact it turned out to be an official

concealment--no blank was provided for its exposure.  And none required

by the law, I suppose.  "It is a good one-sided idea," I remarked;

"They can take your money and ship your telegram next year if they want

to--you've no redress.  The law ought to extend the privilege to all of

us."



The boy looked upon me coldly.



I asked him when the telegram reached York Harbor.  He pointed to some

figures following the signature at the bottom of the blank--"12.14."

I said it was now 1.45 and asked--



"Do you mean that it reached your morgue an hour and a half ago?"



He nodded assent.



"It was at that time half an hour too late to be of any use to me, if I

wanted to go and meet my people--which was the case--for by the wording

of the message you can see that they were to arrive at the station at

11.45.  Why did, your h. c. send me this useless message?  Can't he read?

Is he dead?"



"It's the rules."



"No, that does not account for it.  Would he have sent it if it had been

three years old, I in the meantime deceased, and he aware of it?"



The boy didn't know.



"Because, you know, a rule which required him to forward to the cemetery

to-day a dispatch due three years ago, would be as good a rule as one

which should require him to forward a telegram to me to-day which he knew

had lost all its value an hour or two before he started it.  The

construction of such a rule would discredit an idiot; in fact an idiot

--I mean a common ordinary Christian idiot, you understand--would be

ashamed of it, and for the sake of his reputation wouldn't make it.  What

do you think?"



He replied with much natural brilliancy that he wasn't paid for thinking.



This gave me a better opinion of the commercial intelligence pervading

his morgue than I had had before; it also softened my feelings toward

him, and also my tone, which had hitherto been tinged with bitterness.



"Let bygones be bygones," I said, gently, "we are all erring creatures,

and mainly idiots, but God made us so and it is dangerous to criticise."

                         Sincerely

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     One day there arrived from Europe a caller with a letter of

     introduction from Elizabeth, Queen of Rumania, better known as

     Carmen Sylva.  The visitor was Madam Hartwig, formerly an American

     girl, returning now, because of reduced fortunes, to find profitable

     employment in her own land.  Her husband, a man of high principle,

     had declined to take part in an "affair of honor," as recognized by

     the Continental code; hence his ruin.  Elizabeth of Rumania was one

     of the most loved and respected of European queens and an author of

     distinction.  Mark Twain had known her in Vienna.  Her letter to him

     and his own letter to the public (perhaps a second one, for its date

     is two years later) follow herewith.





                     From Carmen Sylva to Mark Twain:



                                                  BUCAREST, May 9, 1902.

HONORED MASTER,--If I venture to address you on behalf of a poor lady,

who is stranded in Bucarest I hope not to be too disagreeable.



Mrs. Hartwig left America at the age of fourteen in order to learn to

sing which she has done thoroughly.  Her husband had quite a brilliant

situation here till he refused to partake 'dans une afaire onereuse',

so it seems.  They haven't a penny and each of them must try to find a

living.  She is very nice and pleasant and her school is so good that she

most certainly can give excellent singing lessons.



I beg your pardon for being a bore to one I so deeply love and admire,

to whom I owe days and days of forgetfulness of self and troubles and the

intensest of all joys: Hero-worship!  People don't always realize what a

happiness that is!  God bless you for every beautiful thought you poured

into my tired heart and for every smile on a weary way!



                                                  CARMEN SYLVA.





                      From Mark Twain to the Public:



                                                       Nov.  16, '04.

TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN,--I desire to recommend Madame Hartwig to my

friends and the public as a teacher of singing and as a concert-vocalist.

She has lived for fifteen years at the court of Roumania, and she brought

with her to America an autograph letter in which her Majesty the Queen of

Roumania cordially certified her to me as being an accomplished and

gifted singer and teacher of singing, and expressed a warm hope that her

professional venture among us would meet with success; through absence in

Europe I have had no opportunity to test the validity of the Queen's

judgment in the matter, but that judgment is the utterance of an entirely

competent authority--the best that occupies a throne, and as good as any

that sits elsewhere, as the musical world well knows--and therefore back

it without hesitation, and endorse it with confidence.



I will explain that the reason her Majesty tried to do her friend a

friendly office through me instead of through someone else was, not that

I was particularly the right or best person for the office, but because I

was not a stranger.  It is true that I am a stranger to some of the

monarchs--mainly through their neglect of their opportunities--but such

is not the case in the present instance.  The latter fact is a high

compliment to me, and perhaps I ought to conceal it.  Some people would.



                                        MARK TWAIN.









     Mrs. Clemens's improvement was scarcely perceptible.  It was not

     until October that they were able to remove her to Riverdale, and

     then only in a specially arranged invalid-car.  At the end of the

     long journey she was carried to her room and did not leave it again

     for many months.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                        RIVERDALE, N. Y., Oct. 31, '02.

DEAR JOE,--It is ten days since Susy [Twichell] wrote that you were laid

up with a sprained shoulder, since which time we have had no news about

it.  I hope that no news is good news, according to the proverb; still,

authoritative confirmation of it will be gladly received in this family,

if some of you will furnish it.  Moreover, I should like to know how and

where it happened.  In the pulpit, as like as not, otherwise you would

not be taking so much pains to conceal it.  This is not a malicious

suggestion, and not a personally-invented one: you told me yourself,

once, that you threw artificial power and impressiveness into places in

your sermons where needed, by "banging the bible"--(your own words.)

You have reached a time of life when it is not wise to take these risks.

You would better jump around.  We all have to change our methods as the

infirmities of age creep upon us.  Jumping around will be impressive now,

whereas before you were gray it would have excited remark.



Poor Livy drags along drearily.  It must be hard times for that turbulent

spirit.  It will be a long time before she is on her feet again.  It is a

most pathetic case.  I wish I could transfer it to myself.  Between

ripping and raging and smoking and reading, I could get a good deal of a

holiday out of it.



Clara runs the house smoothly and capably.  She is discharging a

trial-cook today and hiring another.

                    A power of love to you all!

                                                  MARK.





Such was the state of Mrs. Clemens's health that visitors were excluded

from the sick room, and even Clemens himself was allowed to see her no

more than a few moments at a time.  These brief, precious visits were the

chief interests of his long days.  Occasionally he was allowed to send

her a few lines, reporting his occupations, and these she was sometimes

permitted to answer.  Only one of his notes has been preserved, written

after a day, now rare, of literary effort.  Its signature, the letter Y,

stands for "Youth," always her name for him.





                             To Mrs. Clemens:



DEAR HEART,--I've done another full day's work, and finished before 4.

I have been reading and dozing since and would have had a real sleep a

few minutes ago but for an incursion to bring me a couple of unimportant

letters.  I've stuck to the bed all day and am getting back my lost

ground.  Next time I will be strictly careful and make my visit very

short--just a kiss and a rush.  Thank you for your dear, dear note; you

who are my own and only sweetheart.

                                        Sleep well!

                                                       Y.









XLII



LETTERS OF 1903.  TO VARIOUS PERSONS.  HARD DAYS AT RIVERDALE.

LAST SUMMER AT ELMIRA.  THE RETURN TO ITALY



The reader may perhaps recall that H. H. Rogers, some five or six years

earlier, had taken charge of the fortunes of Helen Keller, making it

possible for her to complete her education.  Helen had now written her

first book--a wonderful book--'The Story of My Life', and it had been

successfully published.  For a later generation it may be proper to

explain that the Miss Sullivan, later Mrs. Macy, mentioned in the letter

which follows, was the noble woman who had devoted her life to the

enlightenment of this blind, dumb girl--had made it possible for her to

speak and understand, and, indeed, to see with the eyes of luminous

imagination.



The case of plagiarism mentioned in this letter is not now remembered,

and does not matter, but it furnished a text for Mark Twain, whose

remarks on the subject in general are eminently worth while.





                   To Helen Keller, in Wrentham, Mass.:



                                             RIVERDALE-ON-THE-HUDSON,

                                             ST.  PATRICK'S DAY, '03.

DEAR HELEN,--I must steal half a moment from my work to say how glad I am

to have your book, and how highly I value it, both for its own sake and

as a remembrances of an affectionate friendship which has subsisted

between us for nine years without a break, and without a single act of

violence that I can call to mind.  I suppose there is nothing like it in

heaven; and not likely to be, until we get there and show off.  I often

think of it with longing, and how they'll say, "There they come--sit

down in front!" I am practicing with a tin halo.  You do the same.  I was

at Henry Rogers's last night, and of course we talked of you.  He is not

at all well; you will not like to hear that; but like you and me, he is

just as lovely as ever.



I am charmed with your book-enchanted.  You are a wonderful creature,

the most wonderful in the world--you and your other half together

--Miss Sullivan, I mean, for it took the pair of you to make a complete

and perfect whole.  How she stands out in her letters! her brilliancy,

penetration, originality, wisdom, character, and the fine literary

competencies of her pen--they are all there.



Oh, dear me, how unspeakably funny and owlishly idiotic and grotesque was

that "plagiarism" farce!  As if there was much of anything in any human

utterance, oral or written, except plagiarism!  The kernal, the soul--let

us go further and say the substance, the bulk, the actual and valuable

material of all human utterances--is plagiarism.  For substantially all

ideas are second-hand, consciously and unconsciously drawn from a million

outside sources, and daily used by the garnerer with a pride and

satisfaction born of the superstition that he originated them; whereas

there is not a rag of originality about them anywhere except the little

discoloration they get from his mental and moral calibre and his

temperament, and which is revealed in characteristics of phrasing.  When

a great orator makes a great speech you are listening to ten centuries

and ten thousand men--but we call it his speech, and really some

exceedingly small portion of it is his.  But not enough to signify.  It

is merely a Waterloo.  It is Wellington's battle, in some degree, and we

call it his; but there are others that contributed.  It takes a thousand

men to invent a telegraph, or a steam engine, or a phonograph, or a

photograph, or a telephone or any other important thing--and the last man

gets the credit and we forget the others.  He added his little mite--that

is all he did.  These object lessons should teach us that ninety-nine

parts of all things that proceed from the intellect are plagiarisms, pure

and simple; and the lesson ought to make us modest.  But nothing can do

that.



Then why don't we unwittingly reproduce the phrasing of a story, as well

as the story itself?  It can hardly happen--to the extent of fifty words

except in the case of a child: its memory-tablet is not lumbered with

impressions, and the actual language can have graving-room there, and

preserve the language a year or two, but a grown person's memory-tablet

is a palimpsest, with hardly a bare space upon which to engrave a phrase.

It must be a very rare thing that a whole page gets so sharply printed

upon a man's mind, by a single reading, that it will stay long enough to

turn up some time or other and be mistaken by him for his own.  No doubt

we are constantly littering our literature with disconnected sentences

borrowed from books at some unremembered time and now imagined to be our

own, but that is about the most we can do.  In 1866 I read Dr. Holmes's

poems, in the Sandwich Islands.  A year and a half later I stole his

dictation, without knowing it, and used it to dedicate my "Innocents

Abroad" with.  Then years afterwards I was talking with Dr. Holmes about

it.  He was not an ignorant ass--no, not he: he was not a collection of

decayed human turnips, like your "Plagiarism Court;" and so when I said,

"I know now where I stole it, but whom did you steal it from," he said,

"I don't remember; I only know I stole it from somebody, because I have

never originated anything altogether myself, nor met anybody who had."



To think of those solemn donkeys breaking a little child's heart with

their ignorant rubbish about plagiarism!  I couldn't sleep for

blaspheming about it last night. Why, their whole lives, their whole

histories, all their learning, all their thoughts, all their opinions

were one solid ruck of plagiarism, and they didn't know it and never

suspected it.  A gang of dull and hoary pirates piously setting

themselves the task of disciplining and purifying a kitten that they

think they've caught filching a chop!  Oh, dam--



But you finish it, dear, I am running short of vocabulary

today.  Ever lovingly your friend,

                                        MARK.



(Edited and modified by Clara Clemens, deputy to her mother, who for more

than 7 months has been ill in bed and unable to exercise her official

function.)





     The burden of the Clemens household had fallen almost entirely upon

     Clara Clemens.  In addition to supervising its customary affairs,

     she also shouldered the responsibility of an unusual combination of

     misfortunes, for besides the critical condition of her mother, her

     sister, Jean Clemens, was down with pneumonia, no word of which must

     come to Mrs. Clemens.  Certainly it was a difficult position.  In

     some account of it, which he set down later, Clemens wrote: "It was

     fortunate for us all that Clara's reputation for truthfulness was so

     well established in her mother's mind.  It was our daily protection

     from disaster.  The mother never doubted Clara's word.  Clara could

     tell her large improbabilities without exciting any suspicion,

     whereas if I tried to market even a small and simple one the case

     would have been different.  I was never able to get a reputation

     like Clara's."



     The accumulation of physical ailments in the Clemens home had

     somewhat modified Mark Twain's notion of medical practice.  He was

     no longer radical; he had become eclectic.  It is a good deal of a

     concession that he makes to Twichell, after those earlier letters

     from Sweden, in which osteopathy had been heralded as the anodyne

     for all human ills.





                  To Rev. J.  H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



DEAR JOE,--Livy does really make a little progress these past 3 or 4

days, progress which is visible to even the untrained eye.  The

physicians are doing good work with her, but my notion is, that no art of

healing is the best for all ills.  I should distribute the ailments

around: surgery cases to the surgeons; lupus to the actinic-ray

specialist; nervous prostration to the Christian Scientist; most ills to

the allopath and the homeopath; (in my own particular case) rheumatism,

gout and bronchial attacks to the osteopathist.



Mr. Rogers was to sail southward this morning--and here is this weather!

I am sorry.  I think it's a question if he gets away tomorrow.

                              Ys Ever

                                        MARK.





     It was through J. Y. M. MacAlister, to whom the next letter is

     written, that Mark Twain had become associated with the Plasmon

     Company, which explains the reference to "shares."  He had seen much

     of MacAlister during the winter at Tedworth Square, and had grown

     fond of him.  It is a characteristic letter, and one of interesting

     fact.





                    To J. Y. M. MacAlister, in London:



                                                  RIVERDALE, NEW YORK.

                                                       April, 7, '03.

DEAR MACALISTER,--Yours arrived last night, and God knows I was glad to

get it, for I was afraid I had blundered into an offence in some way and

forfeited your friendship--a kind of blunder I have made so many times in

my life that I am always standing in a waiting and morbid dread of its

occurrence.



Three days ago I was in condition--during one horribly long night--to

sympathetically roast with you in your "hell of troubles."  During that

night I was back again where I was in the black days when I was buried

under a mountain of debt.  I called the daughters to me in private

council and paralysed them with the announcement, "Our outgo has

increased in the past 8 months until our expenses are now 125 per cent.

greater than our income."



It was a mistake.  When I came down in the morning a gray and aged wreck,

and went over the figures again, I found that in some unaccountable way

(unaccountable to a business man but not to me) I had multiplied the

totals by 2.  By God I dropped 75 years on the floor where I stood.



Do you know it affected me as one is affected when he wakes out of a

hideous dream and finds that it was only a dream.  It was a great comfort

and satisfaction to me to call the daughters to a private meeting of the

Board again and say, "You need not worry any more; our outgo is only a

third more than our income; in a few months your mother will be out of

her bed and on her feet again--then we shall drop back to normal and be

all right."



Certainly there is a blistering and awful reality about a well-arranged

unreality.  It is quite within the possibilities that two or three nights

like that night of mine could drive a man to suicide.  He would refuse to

examine the figures; they would revolt him so, and he could go to his

death unaware that there was nothing serious about them.  I cannot get

that night out of my head, it was so vivid, so real, so ghastly.  In any

other year of these 33 the relief would have been simple: go where you

can cut your cloth to fit your income.  You can't do that when your wife

can't be moved, even from one room to the next.



Clam spells the trained nurse afternoons; I am allowed to see Mrs.

Clemens 20 minutes twice a day and write her two letters a day provided I

put no news in them.  No other person ever sees her except the physician

and now and then a nerve-specialist from New York.  She saw there was

something the matter that morning, but she got no facts out of me.  But

that is nothing--she hasn't had anything but lies for 8 months.  A fact

would give her a relapse.



The doctor and a specialist met in conspiracy five days ago, and in their

belief she will by and by come out of this as good as new, substantially.

They ordered her to Italy for next winter--which seems to indicate that

by autumn she will be able to undertake the voyage.  So Clara is writing

a Florence friend to take a look round among the villas for us in the

regions near that city.  It seems early to do this, but Joan Bergheim

thought it would be wise.



He and his wife lunched with us here yesterday.  They have been abroad in

Havana 4 months, and they sailed for England this morning.



I am enclosing an order for half of my (your) Founders shares.  You are

not to refuse them this time, though you have done it twice before.  They

are yours, not mine, and for your family's sake if not your own you

cannot in these cloudy days renounce this property which is so clearly

yours and theirs.  You have been generous long enough; be just, now to

yourself.  Mr. Rogers is off yachting for 5 or 6 weeks--I'll get them

when he returns.  The head of the house joins me in warmest greetings and

remembrances to you and Mrs. MacAlister.

                         Ever yours,

                                        Mark.



May 8.  Great Scott!  I never mailed this letter!  I addressed it, put

"Registered" on it--then left it lying unsealed on the arm of my chair,

and rushed up to my bed quaking with a chill.  I've never been out of the

bed since--oh, bronchitis, rheumatism, two sets of teeth aching, land,

I've had a dandy time for 4 weeks.  And to-day--great guns, one of the

very worst!  .  .  .



I'm devilish sorry, and I do apologise--for although I am not as slow as

you are about answering letters, as a rule, I see where I'm standing this

time.



Two weeks ago Jean was taken down again--this time with measles, and I

haven't been able to go to her and she hasn't been able to come to me.



But Mrs. Clemens is making nice progress, and can stand alone a moment or

two at a time.



Now I'll post this.

                                   MARK





     The two letters that follow, though written only a few days apart,

     were separated in their arrival by a period of seven years.  The

     second letter was, in some way, mislaid and not mailed; and it was

     not until after the writer of it was dead that it was found and

     forwarded.



     Mark Twain could never get up much enthusiasm for the writings of

     Scott.  His praise of Quentin Durward is about the only approval he

     ever accorded to the works of the great romanticist.





                    To Brander Matthews, in New York:



                                             NEW YORK CITY, May 4, '03.

DEAR BRANDER,--I haven't been out of my bed for four weeks, but--well, I

have been reading, a good deal, and it occurs to me to ask you to sit

down, some time or other when you have 8 or 9 months to spare, and jot me

down a certain few literary particulars for my help and elevation.  Your

time need not be thrown away, for at your further leisure you can make

Colombian lectures out of the results and do your students a good turn.



1.  Are there in Sir Walter's novels passages done in good English

--English which is neither slovenly or involved?



2.  Are there passages whose English is not poor and thin and

commonplace, but is of a quality above that?



3.  Are there passages which burn with real fire--not punk, fox-fire,

make believe?



4.  Has he heroes and heroines who are not cads and cadesses?



5.  Has he personages whose acts and talk correspond with their

characters as described by him?



6.  Has he heroes and heroines whom the reader admires, admires, and

knows why?



7.  Has he funny characters that are funny, and humorous passages that

are humorous?



8.  Does he ever chain the reader's interest, and make him reluctant to

lay the book down?



9.  Are there pages where he ceases from posing, ceases from admiring the

placid flood and flow of his own dilutions, ceases from being artificial,

and is for a time, long or short, recognizably sincere and in earnest?



10.  Did he know how to write English, and didn't do it because he didn't

want to?



11.  Did he use the right word only when he couldn't think of another

one, or did he run so much to wrong because he didn't know the right one

when he saw it?



13.  Can you read him? and keep your respect for him?  Of course a

person could in his day--an era of sentimentality and sloppy romantics

--but land! can a body do it today?



Brander, I lie here dying, slowly dying, under the blight of Sir Walter.

I have read the first volume of Rob Roy, and as far as chapter XIX of Guy

Mannering, and I can no longer hold my head up nor take my nourishment.

Lord, it's all so juvenile! so artificial, so shoddy; and such wax

figures and skeletons and spectres.  Interest?  Why, it is impossible to

feel an interest in these bloodless shams, these milk-and-water humbugs.

And oh, the poverty of the invention!  Not poverty in inventing

situations, but poverty in furnishing reasons for them.  Sir Walter

usually gives himself away when he arranges for a situation--elaborates,

and elaborates, and elaborates, till if you live to get to it you don't

believe in it when it happens.



I can't find the rest of Rob Roy, I can't stand any more Mannering--I do

not know just what to do, but I will reflect, and not quit this great

study rashly.  He was great, in his day, and to his proper audience; and

so was God in Jewish times, for that matter, but why should either of

them rank high now?  And do they?--honest, now, do they?  Dam'd if I

believe it.



My, I wish I could see you and Leigh Hunt!

                                      Sincerely Yours

                                             S. L. CLEMENS.





                    To Brander Matthews, in New York:



                              RIVERDALE, May 8,'03 (Mailed June, 1910).

DEAR BRANDER,--I'm still in bed, but the days have lost their dulness

since I broke into Sir Walter and lost my temper.  I finished Guy

Mannering--that curious, curious book, with its mob of squalid shadows

jabbering around a single flesh-and-blood being--Dinmont; a book crazily

put together out of the very refuse of the romance-artist's stage

properties--finished it and took up Quentin Durward, and finished that.



It was like leaving the dead to mingle with the living: it was like

withdrawing from the infant class in the College of journalism to sit

under the lectures in English literature in Columbia University.



I wonder who wrote Quentin Durward?

                                   Yrs ever

                                             MARK.





     In 1903, preparations were going on for a great world's fair, to be

     held in St. Louis, and among other features proposed was a World's

     Literary Convention, with a week to be set apart in honor of Mark

     Twain, and a special Mark Twain Day in it, on which the National

     Association would hold grand services in honor of the distinguished

     Missourian.  A letter asking his consent to the plan brought the

     following reply.





                      To T.  F.  Gatts, of Missouri:



                                                  NEW YORK, May 30, 1903.

DEAR MR. GATTS,--It is indeed a high compliment which you offer me in

naming an association after me and in proposing the setting apart of a

Mark Twain day at the great St. Louis fair, but such compliments are not

proper for the living; they are proper and safe for the dead only.  I

value the impulse which moves you to tender me these honors.  I value it

as highly as any one can, and am grateful for it, but I should stand in a

sort of terror of the honors themselves.  So long as we remain alive we

are not safe from doing things which, however righteously and honorably

intended, can wreck our repute and extinguish our friendships.



I hope that no society will be named for me while I am still alive, for I

might at some time or other do something which would cause its members to

regret having done me that honor.  After I shall have joined the dead I

shall follow the customs of those people and be guilty of no conduct that

can wound any friend; but until that time shall come I shall be a

doubtful quantity like the rest of our race.

                              Very truly yours,

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.





     The National Mark Twain Association did not surrender easily.  Mr.

     Gatts wrote a second letter full of urgent appeal.  If Mark Twain

     was tempted, we get no hint of it in his answer.





                       To T. F. Gatts, of Missouri:



                                             NEW YORK, June 8, 1903.

DEAR MR. GATTS,--While I am deeply touched by the desire of my friends of

Hannibal to confer these great honors upon me, I must still forbear to

accept them.  Spontaneous and unpremeditated honors, like those which

came to me at Hannibal, Columbia, St. Louis and at the village stations

all down the line, are beyond all price and are a treasure for life in

the memory, for they are a free gift out of the heart and they come

without solicitations; but I am a Missourian and so I shrink from

distinctions which have to be arranged beforehand and with my privity,

for I then became a party to my own exalting.  I am humanly fond of

honors that happen but chary of those that come by canvass and intention.

With sincere thanks to you and your associates for this high compliment

which you have been minded to offer me, I am,

                                   Very truly yours,

                                             S. L. CLEMENS.





     We have seen in the letter to MacAlister that Mark Twain's wife had

     been ordered to Italy and plans were in progress for an

     establishment there.  By the end of June Mrs. Clemens was able to

     leave Riverdale, and she made the journey to Quarry Farm, Elmira,

     where they would remain until October, the month planned for their

     sailing.  The house in Hartford had been sold; and a house which,

     prior to Mrs. Clemens's breakdown they had bought near Tarrytown

     (expecting to settle permanently on the Hudson) had been let.  They

     were going to Europe for another indefinite period.



     At Quarry Farm Mrs. Clemens continued to improve, and Clemens, once

     more able to work, occupied the study which Mrs. Crane had built for

     him thirty years before, and where Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn and the

     Wandering Prince had been called into being.





               To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford, Conn.:



                                             QUARRY FARM, ELMIRA, N. Y.,

                                                       July 21, '03.

DEAR JOE,--That love-letter delighted Livy beyond any like utterance

received by her these thirty years and more.  I was going to answer it

for her right away, and said so; but she reserved the privilege to

herself.  I judge she is accumulating Hot Stuff--as George Ade would say.

.  .  .



Livy is coming along: eats well, sleeps some, is mostly very gay, not

very often depressed; spends all day on the porch, sleeps there a part of

the night, makes excursions in carriage and in wheel-chair; and, in the

matter of superintending everything and everybody, has resumed business

at the old stand.



Did you ever go house-hunting 3,000 miles away?  It costs three months of

writing and telegraphing to pull off a success.  We finished 3 or 4 days

ago, and took the Villa Papiniano (dam the name, I have to look at it a

minutes after writing it, and then am always in doubt) for a year by

cable.  Three miles outside of Florence, under Fiesole--a darling

location, and apparently a choice house, near Fiske.



There's 7 in our gang.  All women but me.  It means trunks and things.

But thanks be!  To-day (this is private) comes a most handsome voluntary

document with seals and escutcheons on it from the Italian Ambassador

(who is a stranger to me) commanding the Customs people to keep their

hands off the Clemens's things.  Now wasn't it lovely of him?  And wasn't

it lovely of me to let Livy take a pencil and edit my answer and knock a

good third of it out?



And that's a nice ship--the Irene! new--swift--13,000 tons--rooms up in

the sky, open to sun and air--and all that.  I was desperately troubled

for Livy--about the down-cellar cells in the ancient "Latin."



The cubs are in Riverdale, yet; they come to us the first week in August.

               With lots and lots of love to you all,

                                        MARK.





     The arrangement for the Villa Papiniano was not completed, after

     all, and through a good friend, George Gregory Smith, a resident of

     Florence, the Villa Quarto, an ancient home of royalty, on the hills

     west of Florence, was engaged.  Smith wrote that it was a very

     beautiful place with a south-eastern exposure, looking out toward

     Valombrosa and the Chianti Hills.  It had extensive grounds and

     stables, and the annual rental for it all was two thousand dollars a

     year.  It seemed an ideal place, in prospect, and there was great

     hope that Mrs. Clemens would find her health once more in the

     Italian climate which she loved.



     Perhaps at this point, when Mark Twain is once more leaving America,

     we may offer two letters from strangers to him--letters of

     appreciation--such as he was constantly receiving from those among

     the thousands to whom he had given happiness.  The first is from

     Samuel Merwin, one day to become a popular novelist, then in the

     hour of his beginnings.





                    To Mark Twain, from Samuel Merwin:



                                                       PLAINFIELD, N. J.

                                                       August 4, 1903.

DEAR MR. CLEMENS,--For a good many years I have been struggling with the

temptation to write you and thank you for the work you have done; and

to-day I seem to be yielding.



During the past two years I have been reading through a group of writers

who seem to me to represent about the best we have--Sir Thomas Malory,

Spenser, Shakespeare, Boswell, Carlyle, Le Sage.  In thinking over one

and then another, and then all of them together, it was plain to see why

they were great men and writers: each brought to his time some new blood,

new ideas,--turned a new current into the stream.  I suppose there have

always been the careful, painstaking writers, the men who are always

taken so seriously by their fellow craftsmen.  It seems to be the

unconventional man who is so rare--I mean the honestly unconventional

man, who has to express himself in his own big way because the

conventional way isn't big enough, because ne needs room and freedom.



We have a group of the more or less conventional men now--men of dignity

and literary position.  But in spite of their influence and of all the

work they have done, there isn't one of them to whom one can give one's

self up without reservation, not one whose ideas seem based on the deep

foundation of all true philosophy,--except Mark Twain.



I hope this letter is not an impertinence.  I have just been turning

about, with my head full of Spenser and Shakespeare and "Gil Blas,"

looking for something in our own present day literature to which I could

surrender myself as to those five gripping old writings.  And nothing

could I find until I took up "Life on the Mississippi," and "Huckleberry

Finn," and, just now, the "Connecticut Yankee."  It isn't the first time

I have read any of these three, and it's because I know it won't be the

last, because these books are the only ones written in my lifetime that

claim my unreserved interest and admiration and, above all, my feelings,

that I've felt I had to write this letter.



I like to think that "Tom Sawyer" and "Huckleberry Finn" will be looked

upon, fifty or a hundred years from now, as the picture of buoyant,

dramatic, human American life.  I feel, deep in my own heart, pretty sure

that they will be.  They won't be looked on then as the work of a

"humorist" any more than we think of Shakespeare as a humorist now.

I don't mean by this to set up a comparison between Mark Twain and

Shakespeare: I don't feel competent to do it; and I'm not at all sure

that it could be done until Mark Twain's work shall have its fair share

of historical perspective.  But Shakespeare was a humorist and so, thank

Heaven! is Mark Twain.  And Shakespeare plunged deep into the deep, sad

things of life; and so, in a different way (but in a way that has more

than once brought tears to my eyes) has Mark Twain.  But after all, it

isn't because of any resemblance for anything that was ever before

written that Mark Twain's books strike in so deep: it's rather because

they've brought something really new into our literature--new, yet old as

Adam and Eve and the Apple.  And this achievement, the achievement of

putting something into literature that was not there before, is, I should

think, the most that any writer can ever hope to do.  It is the one mark

of distinction between the "lonesome" little group of big men and the

vast herd of medium and small ones.  Anyhow, this much I am sure of--to

the young man who hopes, however feebly, to accomplish a little

something, someday, as a writer, the one inspiring example of our time is

Mark Twain.

                         Very truly yours,

                                        SAMUEL MERWIN.





Mark Twain once said he could live a month on a good compliment, and from

his reply, we may believe this one to belong in, that class.





                 To Samuel Merwin, in Plainfield, N. J.:



                                                       Aug.  16, '03.

DEAR MR. MERWIN,--What you have said has given me deep pleasure--indeed I

think no words could be said that could give me more.

                              Very sincerely yours,

                                             S. L. CLEMENS.





     The next "compliment" is from one who remains unknown, for she

     failed to sign her name in full.  But it is a lovely letter, and

     loses nothing by the fact that the writer of it was willing to

     remain in obscurity.





                   To Mark Twain, from Margaret M----:



                                                  PORTLAND, OREGON

                                                  Aug. 18, 1903.

MY DEAR, DEAR MARK TWAIN,--May a little girl write and tell you how

dearly she loves and admires your writings?  Well, I do and I want to

tell you your ownself.  Don't think me too impertinent for indeed I don't

mean to be that!  I have read everything of yours that I could get and

parts that touch me I have read over and over again.  They seem such dear

friends to me, so like real live human beings talking and laughing,

working and suffering too!  One cannot but feel that it is your own life

and experience that you have painted.  So do not wonder that you seem a

dear friend to me who has never even seen you.  I often think of you as

such in my own thoughts.  I wonder if you will laugh when I tell you I

have made a hero of you?  For when people seem very sordid and mean and

stupid (and it seems as if everybody was) then the thought will come like

a little crumb of comfort "well, Mark Twain isn't anyway."  And it does

really brighten me up.



You see I have gotten an idea that you are a great, bright spirit of

kindness and tenderness.  One who can twist everybody's-even your

own-faults and absurdities into hearty laughs.  Even the person mocked

must laugh!  Oh, Dear!  How often you have made me laugh!  And yet as

often you have struck something infinite away down deep in my heart so

that I want to cry while half laughing!



So this all means that I want to thank you and to tell you.  "God always

love Mark Twain!" is often my wish. I dearly love to read books, and I

never tire of reading yours; they always have a charm for me.  Good-bye,

I am afraid I have not expressed what I feel.  But at least I have tried.

                         Sincerely yours.

                                   MARGARET M.----





     Clemens and family left Elmira October the 5th for New York City.

     They remained at the Hotel Grosvenor until their sailing date,

     October 24th.  A few days earlier, Mr. Frank Doubleday sent a volume

     of Kipling's poems and de Blowitz's Memoirs for entertainment on the

     ship.  Mark Twain's acknowledgment follows.





                     To F. N. Doubleday, in New York:



                                                       THE GROSVENOR,

                                                       October 12, '03.

DEAR DOUBLEDAY,--The books came--ever so many thanks.  I have been

reading "The Bell Buoy" and "The Old Men" over and over again--my custom

with Kipling's work-and saving up the rest for other leisurely and

luxurious meals.  A bell-buoy is a deeply impressive fellow-being.

In these many recent trips up and down the Sound in the Kanawha

--[Mr. Rogers's yacht.]--he has talked to me nightly, sometimes in his

pathetic and melancholy way, sometimes with his strenuous and urgent

note, and I got his meaning--now I have his words!  No one but Kipling

could do this strong and vivid thing.  Some day I hope to hear the poem

chanted or sung--with the bell-buoy breaking in, out of the distance.



"The Old Men," delicious, isn't it?  And so comically true.  I haven't

arrived there yet, but I suppose I am on the way....

                                   Yours ever,

                                             MARK.



P. S.  Your letter has arrived.  It makes me proud and glad--what Kipling

says.  I hope Fate will fetch him to Florence while we are there.

I would rather see him than any other man.



We've let the Tarrytown house for a year.  Man, you would never have

believed a person could let a house in these times.  That one's for sale,

the Hartford one is sold.  When we buy again may we--may I--be damned....



I've dipped into Blowitz and find him quaintly and curiously interesting.

I think he tells the straight truth, too.  I knew him a little, 23 years

ago.



     The appreciative word which Kipling had sent Doubleday was: "I love

     to think of the great and God-like Clemens.  He is the biggest man

     you have on your side of the water by a damn sight, and don't you

     forget it.  Cervantes was a relation of his."









XLIII



LETTERS OF 1904.  TO VARIOUS PERSONS.  LIFE IN VILLA QUARTO.  DEATH OF

MRS. CLEMENS.  THE RETURN TO AMERICA



Mrs. Clemens stood the voyage to Italy very well and, in due time, the

family were installed in the Villa Reale di Quarto, the picturesque old

Palace of Cosimo, a spacious, luxurious place, even if not entirely

cheerful or always comfortable during the changeable Tuscan winter.

Congratulated in a letter from MacAlister in being in the midst of

Florentine sunshine, he answered: "Florentine sunshine?  Bless you, there

isn't any.  We have heavy fogs every morning, and rain all day.  This

house is not merely large, it is vast--therefore I think it must always

lack the home feeling."



Neither was their landlady, the American wife of an Italian count, all

that could be desired.  From a letter to Twichell, however, we learn that

Mark Twain's work was progressing well.





                   To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                                  VILLA DI QUARTO,

                                             FLORENCE, Jan. 7, '04.

DEAR JOE,--.  .  .  I have had a handsome success, in one way, here.

I left New York under a sort of half promise to furnish to the Harper

magazines 30,000 words this year.  Magazining is difficult work because

every third page represents 2 pages that you have put in the fire;

(because you are nearly sure to start wrong twice) and so when you have

finished an article and are willing to let it go to print it represents

only 10 cents a word instead of 30.



But this time I had the curious (and unprecedented) luck to start right

in each case.  I turned out 37,000 words in 25 working days; and the

reason I think I started right every time is, that not only have I

approved and accepted the several articles, but the court of last resort

(Livy) has done the same.



On many of the between-days I did some work, but only of an idle and not

necessarily necessary sort, since it will not see print until I am dead.

I shall continue this (an hour per day) but the rest of the year I expect

to put in on a couple of long books (half-completed ones.) No more

magazine-work hanging over my head.



This secluded and silent solitude this clean, soft air and this

enchanting view of Florence, the great valley and the snow-mountains that

frame it are the right conditions for work.  They are a persistent

inspiration.  To-day is very lovely; when the afternoon arrives there

will be a new picture every hour till dark, and each of them divine--or

progressing from divine to diviner and divinest.  On this (second) floor

Clara's room commands the finest; she keeps a window ten feet high wide

open all the time and frames it in.  I go in from time to time, every day

and trade sass for a look.  The central detail is a distant and stately

snow-hump that rises above and behind blackforested hills, and its

sloping vast buttresses, velvety and sun-polished with purple shadows

between, make the sort of picture we knew that time we walked in

Switzerland in the days of our youth.



I wish I could show your letter to Livy--but she must wait a week or so

for it.  I think I told you she had a prostrating week of tonsilitis a

month ago; she has remained very feeble ever since, and confined to the

bed of course, but we allow ourselves to believe she will regain the lost

ground in another month.  Her physician is Professor Grocco--she could

not have a better.  And she has a very good trained nurse.



Love to all of you from all of us.  And to all of our dear Hartford

friends.

                    MARK



P. S.  3 days later.



Livy is as remarkable as ever.  The day I wrote you--that night, I mean

--she had a bitter attack of gout or rheumatism occupying the whole left

arm from shoulder to fingers, accompanied by fever.  The pains racked her

50 or 60 hours; they have departed, now--and already she is planning a

trip to Egypt next fall, and a winter's sojourn there!  This is life in

her yet.



You will be surprised that I was willing to do so much magazine-writing

--a thing I have always been chary about--but I had good reasons.  Our

expenses have been so prodigious for a year and a half, and are still so

prodigious, that Livy was worrying altogether too much about them, and

doing a very dangerous amount of lying awake on their account.  It was

necessary to stop that, and it is now stopped.



Yes, she is remarkable, Joe.  Her rheumatic attack set me to cursing and

swearing, without limit as to time or energy, but it merely concentrated

her patience and her unconquerable fortitude.  It is the difference

between us.  I can't count the different kinds of ailments which have

assaulted her in this fiendish year and a half--and I forgive none of

them--but here she comes up again as bright and fresh and enterprising as

ever, and goes to planning about Egypt, with a hope and a confidence

which are to me amazing.



Clara is calling for me--we have to go into town and pay calls.



                                   MARK.





     In Florence, that winter, Clemens began dictating to his secretary

     some autobiographical chapters.  This was the work which was "not to

     see print until I am dead."  He found it a pleasant, lazy occupation

     and wrote his delight in it to Howells in a letter which seems not

     to have survived.  In his reply, Howells wrote: "You do stir me

     mightily with the hope of dictating and I will try it when I get the

     chance.  But there is the tempermental difference.  You are dramatic

     and unconscious; you count the thing more than yourself; I am cursed

     with consciousness to the core, and can't say myself out; I am

     always saying myself in, and setting myself above all that I say, as

     of more worth.  Lately I have felt as if I were rotting with

     egotism.  I don't admire myself; I am sick of myself; but I can't

     think of anything else.  Here I am at it now, when I ought to be

     rejoicing with you at the blessing you have found ....  I'd like,

     immensely, to read your autobiography.  You always rather bewildered

     me by your veracity, and I fancy you may tell the truth about

     yourself.  But all of it?  The black truth which we all know of

     ourselves in our hearts, or only the whity-brown truth of the

     pericardium, or the nice, whitened truth of the shirtfront?  Even

     you won't tell the black heart's--truth.  The man who could do it

     would be famed to the last day the sun shone upon."



     We gather from Mark Twain's answer that he was not deceiving himself

     in the matter of his confessions.





                      To W. D. Howells, in New York:



                                             VILLA DI QUARTO, FLORENCE,

                                                       March 14, '04.

DEAR HOWELLS,--Yes, I set up the safeguards, in the first day's

dictating; taking this position: that an autobiography is the truest of

all books; for while it inevitably consists mainly of extinctions of the

truth, shirkings of the truth, partial revealments of the truth, with

hardly an instance of plain straight truth, the remorseless truth is

there, between the lines, where the author is raking dust upon it, the

result being that the reader knows the author in spite of his wily

diligences.



The summer in England! you can't ask better luck than that.  Then you

will run over to Florence; we shall all be hungry to see you-all.  We are

hunting for another villa, (this one is plenty large enough but has no

room in it) but even if we find it I am afraid it will be months before

we can move Mrs. Clemens.  Of course it will.  But it comforts us to let

on that we think otherwise, and these pretensions help to keep hope alive

in her.

                    Good-bye, with love, Amen.

                              Yours ever

                                        MARK.





     News came of the death of Henry M.  Stanley, one of Mark Twain's

     oldest friends.  Clemens once said that he had met Stanley in St.

     Louis where he (Clemens) had delivered a lecture which Stanley had

     reported.  In the following letter he fixes the date of their

     meeting as early in 1867, which would be immediately after Mark

     Twain's return from California, and just prior to the Quaker City

     excursion--a fact which is interesting only because it places the

     two men together when each was at the very beginning of a great

     career.





                       To Lady Stanley, in England:



                                   VILLA DI QUARTO, FIRENZE, May 11, '04.

DEAR LADY STANLEY,--I have lost a dear and honored friend--how fast they

fall about me now, in my age!  The world has lost a tried and proved

hero.  And you--what have you lost?  It is beyond estimate--we who know

you, and what he was to you, know that.  How far he stretches across my

life!  I knew him when his work was all before him five years before the

great day that he wrote his name far-away up on the blue of the sky for

the world to see and applaud and remember; I have known him as friend and

intimate ever since.  It is 37 years.  I have known no other friend and

intimate so long, except John Hay--a friendship which dates from the same

year and the same half of it, the first half of 1867.  I grieve with you

and with your family, dear Lady Stanley, it is all I can do; but that I

do out of my heart.  It would be we, instead of I, if Mrs. Clemens knew,

but in all these 20 months that she has lain a prisoner in her bed we

have hidden from her all things that could sadden her.  Many a friend is

gone whom she still asks about and still thinks is living.



In deepest sympathy I beg the privilege of signing myself

                         Your friend,

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.





                  To  Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                        VILLA DI QUARTO, May 11, '04

DEAR JOE,--Yours has this moment arrived--just as I was finishing a note

to poor Lady Stanley.  I believe the last country-house visit we paid in

England was to Stanley's.  Lord, how my friends and acquaintances fall

about me now, in my gray-headed days!  Vereschagin, Mommsen, Dvorak,

Lenbach, Jokai--all so recently, and now Stanley.  I had known Stanley 37

years.  Goodness, who is it I haven't known!  As a rule the necrologies

find me personally interested--when they treat of old stagers.  Generally

when a man dies who is worth cabling, it happens that I have run across

him somewhere, some time or other.



Oh, say!  Down by the Laurentian Library there's a marble image that has

been sitting on its pedestal some 450 Years, if my dates are right

--Cosimo I.  I've seen the back of it many a time, but not the front; but

yesterday I twisted my head around after we had driven by, and the

profane exclamation burst from my mouth before I could think: "there's

Chauncey Depew!"



I mean to get a photo of it--and use it if it confirms yesterday's

conviction.  That's a very nice word from the Catholic Magazine and I am

glad you sent it.  I mean to show it to my priest--we are very fond of

him.  He is a stealing man, and is also learnedly scientific.  He

invented the thing which records the seismatic disturbances, for the

peoples of the earth.  And he's an astronomer and has an observatory of

his own.



Ah, many's the cry I have, over reflecting that maybe we could have had

Young Harmony for Livy, and didn't have wit enough to think of it.



Speaking of Livy reminds me that your inquiry arrives at a good time

(unberufen) It has been weeks (I don't know how many!) since we could

have said a hopeful word, but this morning Katy came the minute the

day-nurse came on watch and said words of a strange and long-forgotten

sound: "Mr. Clemens, Mrs. Clemens is really and truly better!--anybody

can see it; she sees it herself; and last night at 9 o'clock she said

it."



There--it is heart-warming, it is splendid, it is sublime; let us enjoy

it, let us make the most of it today--and bet not a farthing on tomorrow.

The tomorrows have nothing for us.  Too many times they have breathed the

word of promise to our ear and broken it to our hope.  We take no

tomorrow's word any more.



You've done a wonder, Joe: you've written a letter that can be sent in to

Livy--that doesn't often happen, when either a friend or a stranger

writes.  You did whirl in a P. S. that wouldn't do, but you wrote it on a

margin of a page in such a way that I was able to clip off the margin

clear across both pages, and now Livy won't perceive that the sheet isn't

the same size it used to was.  It was about Aldrich's son, and I came

near forgetting to remove it.  It should have been written on a loose

strip and enclosed.  That son died on the 5th of March and Aldrich wrote

me on the night before that his minutes were numbered.  On the 18th Livy

asked after that patient, and I was prepared, and able to give her a

grateful surprise by telling her "the Aldriches are no longer uneasy

about him."



I do wish I could have been present and heard Charley Clark.  When he

can't light up a dark place nobody can.

                    With lots of love to you all.

                                                  MARK.





     Mrs. Clemens had her bad days and her good days-days when there

     seemed no ray of light, and others that seemed almost to promise

     recovery.  The foregoing letter to Twichell, and the one which

     follows, to Richard Watson Gilder, reflect the hope and fear that

     daily and hourly alternated at Villa Quarto





                  To Richard Watson Gilder, in New York:



                                        VILLA DI QUARTO, FLORENCE,

                                             May 12, '04.

DEAR GILDER,--A friend of ours (the Baroness de Nolda) was here this

afternoon and wanted a note of introduction to the Century, for she has

something to sell to you in case you'll want to make her an offer after

seeing a sample of the goods.  I said "With pleasure: get the goods

ready, send the same to me, I will have Jean type-write them, then I will

mail them to the Century and tonight I will write the note to Mr. Gilder

and start it along.  Also write me a letter embodying what you have been

saying to me about the goods and your proposed plan of arranging and

explaining them, and I will forward that to Gilder too."



As to the Baroness.  She is a German; 30 years old; was married at 17; is

very pretty-indeed I might say very pretty; has a lot of sons (5) running

up from seven to 12 years old.  Her husband is a Russian.  They live half

the time in Russia and the other half in Florence, and supply population

alternately to the one country and then to the other.  Of course it is a

family that speaks languages.  This occurs at their table--I know it by

experience: It is Babel come again.  The other day, when no guests were

present to keep order, the tribes were all talking at once, and 6

languages were being traded in; at last the littlest boy lost his temper

and screamed out at the top of his voice, with angry sobs: "Mais,

vraiment, io non capisco gar nichts."



The Baroness is a little afraid of her English, therefore she will write

her remarks in French--I said there's a plenty of translators in New

York.  Examine her samples and drop her a line.



For two entire days, now, we have not been anxious about Mrs. Clemens

(unberufen).  After 20 months of bed-ridden solitude and bodily misery

she all of a sudden ceases to be a pallid shrunken shadow, and looks

bright and young and pretty.  She remains what she always was, the most

wonderful creature of fortitude, patience, endurance and recuperative

power that ever was.  But ah, dear, it won't last; this fiendish malady

will play new treacheries upon her, and I shall go back to my prayers

again--unutterable from any pulpit!

                    With love to you and yours,

                                             S. L. C.



May 13 10 A.M.  I have just paid one of my pair of permitted 2 minutes

visits per day to the sick room.  And found what I have learned to

expect--retrogression, and that pathetic something in the eye which

betrays the secret of a waning hope.





     The year of the World's Fair had come, and an invitation from Gov.

     Francis, of Missouri, came to Mark Twain in Florence, personally

     inviting him to attend the great celebration and carry off first

     prize.  We may believe that Clemens felt little in the spirit of

     humor, but to such an invitation he must send a cheerful, even if

     disappointing, answer.





                      To Gov. Francis, of Missouri:



                                             VILLA DI QUARTO, FIRENZE,

                                                       May 26, 1904.

DEAR GOVERNOR FRANCIS,--It has been a dear wish of mine to exhibit myself

at the Great Fair and get a prize, but circumstances beyond my control

have interfered, and I must remain in Florence.  Although I have never

taken prizes anywhere else I used to take them at school in Missouri half

a century ago, and I ought to be able to repeat, now, if I could have a

chance.  I used to get the medal for good spelling, every week, and I

could have had the medal for good conduct if there hadn't been so much

curruption in Missouri in those days; still, I got it several times by

trading medals and giving boot.  I am willing to give boot now, if

--however, those days are forever gone by in Missouri, and perhaps it is

better so.  Nothing ever stops the way it was in this changeable world.

Although I cannot be at the Fair, I am going to be represented there

anyway, by a portrait, by Professor Gelli.  You will find it excellent.

Good judges here say it is better than the original.  They say it has all

the merits of the original and keeps still, besides.  It sounds like

flattery, but it is just true.



I suppose you will get a prize, because you have created the most

prodigious and in all ways most wonderful Fair the planet has ever seen.

Very well, you have indeed earned it: and with it the gratitude of the

State and the nation.

                                   Sincerely yours,

                                                  MARK TWAIN



     It was only a few days after the foregoing was written that death

     entered Villa Quarto--unexpectedly at last--for with the first June

     days Mrs. Clemens had seemed really to improve.  It was on Sunday,

     June 5th, that the end came.  Clemens, with his daughter Jean, had

     returned from a long drive, during which they had visited a Villa

     with the thought of purchase.  On their return they were told that

     their patient had been better that afternoon than for three months.

     Yet it was only a few hours later that she left them, so suddenly

     and quietly that even those near her did not at first realize that

     she was gone.





                      To W. D. Howells, in New York.



                                        VILLA DI QUARTO, FLORENCE,

                                             June 6, '94. [1904]

DEAR HOWELLS,--Last night at 9.20 I entered Mrs. Clemens's room to say

the usual goodnight--and she was dead--tho' no one knew it.  She had been

cheerfully talking, a moment before.  She was sitting up in bed--she had

not lain down for months--and Katie and the nurse were supporting her.

They supposed she had fainted, and they were holding the oxygen pipe to

her mouth, expecting to revive her.  I bent over her and looked in her

face, and I think I spoke--I was surprised and troubled that she did not

notice me.  Then we understood, and our hearts broke.  How poor we are

today!



But how thankful I am that her persecutions are ended.  I would not call

her back if I could.



Today, treasured in her worn old Testament, I found a dear and gentle

letter from you, dated Far Rockaway, Sept.  13, 1896, about our poor

Susy's death.  I am tired and old; I wish I were with Livy.



I send my love-and hers-to you all.

                                   S. L. C.





     In a letter to Twichell he wrote: "How sweet she was in death; how

     young, how beautiful, how like her dear, girlish self cf thirty

     years ago; not a gray hair showing."



     The family was now without plans for the future until they

     remembered the summer home of R. W. Gilder, at Tyringham,

     Massachusetts, and the possibility of finding lodgment for

     themselves in that secluded corner of New England.  Clemens wrote

     without delay, as follows:





                      To R. W. Gilder, in New York:



                                             VILLA DI QUARTO, FLORENCE,

                                                  June 7, '04.

DEAR GILDER FAMILY,--I have been worrying and worrying to know what to

do: at last I went to the girls with an idea: to ask the Gilders to get

us shelter near their summer home.  It was the first time they have not

shaken their heads.  So to-morrow I will cable to you and shall hope to

be in time.



An, hour ago the best heart that ever beat for me and mine went silent

out of this house, and I am as one who wanders and has lost his way.  She

who is gone was our head, she was our hands.  We are now trying to make

plans--we: we who have never made a plan before, nor ever needed to.  If

she could speak to us she would make it all simple and easy with a word,

and our perplexities would vanish away.  If she had known she was near to

death she would have told us where to go and what to do: but she was not

suspecting, neither were we.  (She had been chatting cheerfully a moment

before, and in an instant she was gone from us and we did not know it.

We were not alarmed, we did not know anything had happened.  It was a

blessed death--she passed away without knowing it.) She was all our

riches and she is gone: she was our breath, she was our life and now we

are nothing.



We send you our love--and with it the love of you that was in her heart

when she died.

                         S.  L.  CLEMENS.





     Howells wrote his words of sympathy, adding: "The character which

     now remains a memory was one of the most perfect ever formed on the

     earth," and again, after having received Clemens's letter: "I cannot

     speak of your wife's having kept that letter of mine where she did.

     You know how it must humiliate a man in his unworthiness to have

     anything of his so consecrated.  She hallowed what she touched, far

     beyond priests."





                      To W. D. Howells, in New York:



                                        VILLA DI QUARTO, '04.

                                             June 12, 6 p. m.

DEAR HOWELLS,--We have to sit and hold our hands and wait--in the silence

and solitude of this prodigious house; wait until June 25, then we go to

Naples and sail in the Prince Oscar the 26th.  There is a ship 12 days

earlier (but we came in that one.) I see Clara twice a day--morning and

evening--greeting--nothing more is allowed.  She keeps her bed, and says

nothing.  She has not cried yet.  I wish she could cry.  It would break

Livy's heart to see Clara.  We excuse ourselves from all the friends that

call--though of course only intimates come.  Intimates--but they are not

the old old friends, the friends of the old, old times when we laughed.



Shall we ever laugh again?  If I could only see a dog that I knew in the

old times! and could put my arms around his neck and tell him all,

everything, and ease my heart.



Think-in 3 hours it will be a week!--and soon a month; and by and by a

year.  How fast our dead fly from us.



She loved you so, and was always as pleased as a child with any notice

you took of her.



Soon your wife will be with you, oh fortunate man!  And John, whom mine

was so fond of.  The sight of him was such a delight to her.  Lord, the

old friends, how dear they are.

                                   S. L. C.





                   To Rev. J. R. Twichell, in Hartford:



                                        VILLA DI QUARTO, FLORENCE,

                                                  June 18, '04.

DEAR JOE,--It is 13 days.  I am bewildered and must remain so for a time

longer.  It was so sudden, so unexpected.  Imagine a man worth a hundred

millions who finds himself suddenly penniless and fifty million in debt

in his old age.



I was richer than any other person in the world, and now I am that pauper

without peer.  Some day I will tell you about it, not now.

                                                            MARK.





     A tide of condolence flowed in from all parts of the world.  It was

     impossible to answer all.  Only a few who had been their closest

     friends received a written line, but the little printed

     acknowledgment which was returned was no mere formality.  It was a

     heartfelt, personal word.



     They arrived in America in July, and were accompanied by Twichell to

     Elmira, and on the 14th Mrs. Clemens was laid to rest by the side of

     Susy and little Langdon.  R. W. Gilder had arranged for them to

     occupy, for the summer, a cottage on his place at Tyringham, in the

     Berkshire Hills.  By November they were at the Grosvenor, in New

     York, preparing to establish themselves in a house which they had

     taken on the corner of Ninth Street and Fifth Avenue--Number 21.





                     To F. N. Doubleday, in New York:



DEAR DOUBLEDAY,--I did not know you were going to England: I would have

freighted you with such messages of homage and affection to Kipling.

And I would have pressed his hand, through you, for his sympathy with

me in my crushing loss, as expressed by him in his letter to Gilder.

You know my feeling for Kipling and that it antedates that expression.



I was glad that the boys came here to invite me to the house-warming and

I think they understood why a man in the shadow of a calamity like mine

could not go.



It has taken three months to repair and renovate our house--corner of 9th

and 5th Avenue, but I shall be in it in io or 15 days hence.  Much of the

furniture went into it today (from Hartford).  We have not seen it for 13

years.  Katy Leary, our old housekeeper, who has been in our service more

than 24 years, cried when she told me about it to-day.  She said "I had

forgotten it was so beautiful, and it brought Mrs. Clemens right back to

me--in that old time when she was so young and lovely."



Jean and my secretary and the servants whom we brought from Italy because

Mrs. Clemens liked them so well, are still keeping house in the Berkshire

hills--and waiting.  Clara (nervously wrecked by her mother's death) is

in the hands of a specialist in 69th St., and I shall not be allowed to

have any communication with her--even telephone--for a year.  I am in

this comfortable little hotel, and still in bed--for I dasn't budge till

I'm safe from my pet devil, bronchitis.



Isn't it pathetic?  One hour and ten minutes before Mrs. Clemens died I

was saying to her "To-day, after five months search, I've found the villa

that will content you: to-morrow you will examine the plans and give it

your consent and I will buy it."  Her eyes danced with pleasure, for she

longed for a home of her own.  And there, on that morrow, she lay white

and cold.  And unresponsive to my reverent caresses--a new thing to me

and a new thing to her; that had not happened before in five and thirty

years.



I am coming to see you and Mrs. Doubleday by and bye.  She loved and

honored Mrs. Doubleday and her work.

                                   Always yours,

                                                  MARK.





     It was a presidential year and the air was thick with politics.

     Mark Twain was no longer actively interested in the political

     situation; he was only disheartened by the hollowness and pretense

     of office-seeking, and the methods of office-seekers in general.

     Grieved that Twichell should still pin his faith to any party when

     all parties were so obviously venal and time-serving, he wrote in

     outspoken and rather somber protest.





                  To Rev. J.  H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



                                             THE GROSVENOR, Nov. 4, '04.

Oh, dear! get out of that sewer--party politics--dear Joe.  At least

with your mouth.  We hail only two men who could make speeches for their

parties and preserve their honor and their dignity.  One of them is dead.

Possibly there were four.  I am sorry for John Hay; sorry and ashamed.

And yet I know he couldn't help it.  He wears the collar, and he had to

pay the penalty.  Certainly he had no more desire to stand up before a

mob of confiding human incapables and debauch them than you had.

Certainly he took no more real pleasure in distorting history, concealing

facts, propagating immoralities, and appealing to the sordid side of

human nature than did you; but he was his party's property, and he had to

climb away down and do it.



It is interesting, wonderfully interesting--the miracles which

party-politics can do with a man's mental and moral make-up.  Look at

McKinley, Roosevelt, and yourself: in private life spotless in character;

honorable, honest, just, humane, generous; scorning trickeries,

treacheries, suppressions of the truth, mistranslations of the meanings

of facts, the filching of credit earned by another, the condoning of

crime, the glorifying of base acts: in public political life the reverse

of all this.



McKinley was a silverite--you concealed it.  Roosevelt was a silverite

--you concealed it.  Parker was a silverite--you publish it.  Along with

a shudder and a warning: "He was unsafe then.  Is he any safer now?"



Joe, even I could be guilty of such a thing as that--if I were in

party-politics; I really believe it.



Mr. Cleveland gave the country the gold standard; by implication you

credit the matter to the Republican party.



By implication you prove the whole annual pension-scoop, concealing the

fact that the bulk of the money goes to people who in no way deserve it.

You imply that all the batteners upon this bribery-fund are Republicans.

An indiscreet confession, since about half of them must have been

Democrats before they were bought.



You as good as praise Order 78.  It is true you do not shout, and you do

not linger, you only whisper and skip--still, what little you do in the

matter is complimentary to the crime.



It means, if it means anything, that our outlying properties will all be

given up by the Democrats, and our flag hauled down.  All of them?  Not

only the properties stolen by Mr. McKinley and Mr. Roosevelt, but the

properties honestly acquired?  Joe, did you believe that hardy statement

when you made it?  Yet you made it, and there it stands in permanent

print.  Now what moral law would suffer if we should give up the stolen

ones?  But--



"You know our standard-bearer.  He will maintain all that we have

gained"--by whatever process.  Land, I believe you!



By George, Joe, you are as handy at the game as if you had been in

training for it all your life.  Your campaign Address is built from the

ground up upon the oldest and best models.  There isn't a paragraph in it

whose facts or morals will wash--not even a sentence, I believe.



But you will soon be out of this.  You didn't want to do it--that is

sufficiently apparent, thanks be!--but you couldn't well get out of it.

In a few days you will be out of it, and then you can fumigate yourself

and take up your legitimate work again and resume your clean and

wholesome private character once more and be happy--and useful.



I know I ought to hand you some guff, now, as propitiation and apology

for these reproaches, but on the whole I believe I won't.



I have inquired, and find that Mitsikuri does not arrive here until

to-morrow night.  I shall watch out, and telephone again, for I greatly

want to see him.

                    Always Yours,

                                   MARK.



P. S.--Nov, 4.  I wish I could learn to remember that it is unjust and

dishonorable to put blame upon the human race for any of its acts.  For

it did not make itself, it did not make its nature, it is merely a

machine, it is moved wholly by outside influences, it has no hand in

creating the outside influences nor in choosing which of them it will

welcome or reject, its performance is wholly automatic, it has no more

mastership nor authority over its mind than it has over its stomach,

which receives material from the outside and does as it pleases with it,

indifferent to it's proprietor's suggestions, even, let alone his

commands; wherefore, whatever the machine does--so called crimes and

infamies included--is the personal act of its Maker, and He, solely, is

responsible.  I wish I could learn to pity the human race instead of

censuring it and laughing at it; and I could, if the outside influences

of old habit were not so strong upon my machine.  It vexes me to catch

myself praising the clean private citizen Roosevelt, and blaming the

soiled President Roosevelt, when I know that neither praise nor blame is

due to him for any thought or word or deed of his, he being merely a

helpless and irresponsible coffee-mill ground by the hand of God.



     Through a misunderstanding, Clemens, something more than a year

     earlier, had severed his connection with the Players' Club, of which

     he had been one of the charter members.  Now, upon his return to New

     York, a number of his friends joined in an invitation to him to

     return.  It was not exactly a letter they sent, but a bit of an old

     Scotch song--



                            "To Mark Twain

                                from

                             The Clansmen.

                         Will ye no come back again,

                         Will ye no come back again?

                         Better lo'ed ye canna be.

                         Will ye no come back again?"



     Those who signed it were David Monroe, of the North American Review;

     Robert Reid, the painter, and about thirty others of the Round Table

     Group, so called because its members were accustomed to lunching at

     a large round table in a bay window of the Player dining-room.  Mark

     Twain's reply was prompt and heartfelt.  He wrote:





                      To Robt.  Reid and the Others:



WELL-BELOVED,--Surely those lovely verses went to Prince Charley's heart,

if he had one, and certainly they have gone to mine.  I shall be glad and

proud to come back again after such a moving and beautiful compliment as

this from comrades whom I have loved so long.  I hope you can poll the

necessary vote; I know you will try, at any rate.  It will be many months

before I can foregather with you, for this black border is not

perfunctory, not a convention; it symbolizes the loss of one whose memory

is the only thing I worship.



It is not necessary for me to thank you--and words could not deliver what

I feel, anyway.  I will put the contents of your envelope in the small

casket where I keep the things which have become sacred to me.



                                                  S.  L.  C.





A year later, Mark Twain did "come back again," as an honorary life

member, and was given a dinner of welcome by those who had signed the

lines urging his return.









XLIV



LETTERS OF 1905.  TO TWICHELL, MR. DUNEKA AND OTHERS.

POLITICS AND HUMANITY.  A SUMMER AT DUBLIN.  MARK TWAIN AT 70



     In 1884 Mark Twain had abandoned the Republican Party to vote for

     Cleveland.  He believed the party had become corrupt, and to his

     last day it was hard for him to see anything good in Republican

     policies or performance.  He was a personal friend of Thedore

     Roosevelt's but, as we have seen in a former letter, Roosevelt the

     politician rarely found favor in his eyes.  With or without

     justification, most of the President's political acts invited his

     caustic sarcasm and unsparing condemnation.  Another letter to

     Twichell of this time affords a fair example.





                  To Rev. J.  H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



                                                       Feb. 16, '05.

DEAR JOE,--I knew I had in me somewhere a definite feeling about the

President if I could only find the words to define it with.  Here they

are, to a hair--from Leonard Jerome: "For twenty years I have loved

Roosevelt the man and hated Roosevelt the statesman and politician."



It's mighty good.  Every time, in 25 years, that I have met Roosevelt the

man, a wave of welcome has streaked through me with the hand-grip;

but whenever (as a rule) I meet Roosevelt the statesman and politician,

I find him destitute of morals and not respectworthy.  It is plain that

where his political self and his party self are concerned he has nothing

resembling a conscience; that under those inspirations he is naively

indifferent to the restraints of duty and even unaware of them; ready to

kick the Constitution into the back yard whenever it gets in the way; and

whenever he smells a vote, not only willing but eager to buy it, give

extravagant rates for it and pay the bill not out of his own pocket or

the party's, but out of the nation's, by cold pillage.  As per Order 78

and the appropriation of the Indian trust funds.



But Roosevelt is excusable--I recognize it and (ought to) concede it.

We are all insane, each in his own way, and with insanity goes

irresponsibility.  Theodore the man is sane; in fairness we ought to keep

in mind that Theodore, as statesman and politician, is insane and

irresponsible.



Do not throw these enlightenments aside, but study them, let them raise

you to higher planes and make you better.  You taught me in my callow

days, let me pay back the debt now in my old age out of a thesaurus with

wisdom smelted from the golden ores of experience.

                         Ever yours for sweetness and light

                                                            MARK.





     The next letter to Twichell takes up politics and humanity in

     general, in a manner complimentary to neither.  Mark Twain was never

     really a pessimist, but he had pessimistic intervals, such as come

     to most of us in life's later years, and at such times he let

     himself go without stint concerning "the damned human race," as he

     called it, usually with a manifest sense of indignation that he

     should be a member of it.  In much of his later writing

     --A Mysterious Stranger for example--he said his say with but small

     restraint, and certainly in his purely intellectual moments he was

     likely to be a pessimist of the most extreme type, capably damning

     the race and the inventor of it.  Yet, at heart, no man loved his

     kind more genuinely, or with deeper compassion, than Mark Twain,

     perhaps for its very weaknesses.  It was only that he had intervals

     --frequent intervals, and rather long ones--when he did not admire

     it, and was still more doubtful as to the ways of providence.





                  To Rev. J.  H.  Twichell, in Hartford:



                                                       March 14, '05.

DEAR JOE,--I have a Puddn'head maxim:



"When a man is a pessimist before 48 he knows too much; if he is an

optimist after it, he knows too little."



It is with contentment, therefore, that I reflect that I am better and

wiser than you.  Joe, you seem to be dealing in "bulks," now; the "bulk"

of the farmers and U. S.  Senators are "honest."  As regards purchase and

sale with money?  Who doubts it?  Is that the only measure of honesty?

Aren't there a dozen kinds of honesty which can't be measured by the

money-standard?  Treason is treason--and there's more than one form of

it; the money-form is but one of them.  When a person is disloyal to any

confessed duty, he is plainly and simply dishonest, and knows it; knows

it, and is privately troubled about it and not proud of himself.  Judged

by this standard--and who will challenge the validity of it?--there isn't

an honest man in Connecticut, nor in the Senate, nor anywhere else.  I do

not even except myself, this time.



Am I finding fault with you and the rest of the populace?  No--I assure

you I am not.  For I know the human race's limitations, and this makes it

my duty--my pleasant duty--to be fair to it.  Each person in it is honest

in one or several ways, but no member of it is honest in all the ways

required by--by what?  By his own standard.  Outside of that, as I look

at it, there is no obligation upon him.



Am I honest?  I give you my word of honor (private) I am not.  For seven

years I have suppressed a book which my conscience tells me I ought to

publish.  I hold it a duty to publish it.  There are other difficult

duties which I am equal to, but I am not equal to that one.  Yes, even I

am dishonest.  Not in many ways, but in some.  Forty-one, I think it is.

We are certainly all honest in one or several ways--every man in the

world--though I have reason to think I am the only one whose black-list

runs so light.  Sometimes I feel lonely enough in this lofty solitude.



Yes, oh, yes, I am not overlooking the "steady progress from age to age

of the coming of the kingdom of God and righteousness."  "From age to

age"--yes, it describes that giddy gait.  I (and the rocks) will not live

to see it arrive, but that is all right--it will arrive, it surely will.

But you ought not to be always ironically apologizing for the Deity.  If

that thing is going to arrive, it is inferable that He wants it to

arrive; and so it is not quite kind of you, and it hurts me, to see you

flinging sarcasms at the gait of it.  And yet it would not be fair in me

not to admit that the sarcasms are deserved.  When the Deity wants a

thing, and after working at it for "ages and ages" can't show even a

shade of progress toward its accomplishment, we--well, we don't laugh,

but it is only because we dasn't.  The source of "righteousness"--is in

the heart?  Yes.  And engineered and directed by the brain?  Yes.  Well,

history and tradition testify that the heart is just about what it was in

the beginning; it has undergone no shade of change.  Its good and evil

impulses and their consequences are the same today that they were in Old

Bible times, in Egyptian times, in Greek times, in Middle Age times, in

Twentieth Century times.  There has been no change.



Meantime, the brain has undergone no change.  It is what it always was.

There are a few good brains and a multitude of poor ones.  It was so in

Old Bible times and in all other times--Greek, Roman, Middle Ages and

Twentieth Century.  Among the savages--all the savages--the average brain

is as competent as the average brain here or elsewhere.  I will prove it

to you, some time, if you like.  And there are great brains among them,

too.  I will prove that also, if you like.



Well, the 19th century made progress--the first progress after "ages and

ages"--colossal progress.  In what?  Materialities.  Prodigious

acquisitions were made in things which add to the comfort of many and

make life harder for as many more.  But the addition to righteousness?

Is that discoverable?  I think not.  The materialities were not invented

in the interest of righteousness; that there is more righteousness in the

world because of them than there, was before, is hardly demonstrable, I

think.  In Europe and America, there is a vast change (due to them) in

ideals--do you admire it?  All Europe and all America, are feverishly

scrambling for money.  Money is the supreme ideal--all others take tenth

place with the great bulk of the nations named.  Money-lust has always

existed, but not in the history of the world was it ever a craze, a

madness, until your time and mine.  This lust has rotted these nations;

it has made them hard, sordid, ungentle, dishonest, oppressive.



Did England rise against the infamy of the Boer war?  No--rose in favor

of it.  Did America rise against the infamy of the Phillipine war?  No

--rose in favor of it.  Did Russia rise against the infamy of the present

war?  No--sat still and said nothing.  Has the Kingdom of God advanced in

Russia since the beginning of time?



Or in Europe and America, considering the vast backward step of the

money-lust?  Or anywhere else?  If there has been any progress toward

righteousness since the early days of Creation--which, in my ineradicable

honesty, I am obliged to doubt--I think we must confine it to ten per

cent of the populations of Christendom, (but leaving, Russia, Spain and

South America entirely out.) This gives us 320,000,000 to draw the ten

per cent from.  That is to say, 32,000,000 have advanced toward

righteousness and the Kingdom of God since the "ages and ages" have been

flying along, the Deity sitting up there admiring.  Well, you see it

leaves 1,200,000,000 out of the race.  They stand just where they have

always stood; there has been no change.



N. B.  No charge for these informations.  Do come down soon, Joe.

                         With love,

                                        MARK.





     St. Clair McKelway, of The Brooklyn Eagle, narrowly escaped injuries

     in a railway accident, and received the following.  Clemens and

     McKelway were old friends.





                   To St. Clair McKelway, in Brooklyn:



                                        21 FIFTH AVE.  Sunday Morning.

                                                  April 30, 1905.

DEAR McKELWAY, Your innumerable friends are grateful, most grateful.



As I understand the telegrams, the engineer of your train had never seen

a locomotive before.  Very well, then, I am once more glad that there is

an Ever-watchful Providence to foresee possible results and send Ogdens

and McIntyres along to save our friends.



The Government's Official report, showing that our railways killed twelve

hundred persons last year and injured sixty thousand convinces me that

under present conditions one Providence is not enough to properly and

efficiently take care of our railroad business.  But it is

characteristically American--always trying to get along short-handed and

save wages.



I am helping your family congratulate themselves, and am your friend as

always.

                    S. L. CLEMENS.





     Clemens did not spend any more summers at Quarry Farm.  All its

     associations were beautiful and tender, but they could only sadden

     him.  The life there had been as of another world, sunlit, idyllic,

     now forever vanished.  For the summer of 1905 he leased the Copley

     Green house at Dublin, New Hampshire, where there was a Boston

     colony of writing and artistic folk, including many of his long-time

     friends.  Among them was Colonel Thomas Wentworth Higginson, who

     wrote a hearty letter of welcome when he heard the news.  Clemens

     replied in kind.





              To Col. Thomas Wentworth Higginson, in Boston:



                              21 FIFTH AVE.  Sunday, March 26, z9o.5.

DEAR COL. HIGGINSON,--I early learned that you would be my neighbor in

the Summer and I rejoiced, recognizing in you and your family a large

asset.  I hope for frequent intercourse between the two households.  I

shall have my youngest daughter with me.  The other one will go from the

rest-cure in this city to the rest-cure in Norfolk Conn and we shall not

see her before autumn.  We have not seen her since the middle of October.



Jean (the youngest daughter) went to Dublin and saw the house and came

back charmed with it.  I know the Thayers of old--manifestly there is no

lack of attractions up there.  Mrs. Thayer and I were shipmates in a wild

excursion perilously near 40 years ago.



You say you "send with this" the story.  Then it should be here but it

isn't, when I send a thing with another thing, the other thing goes but

the thing doesn't, I find it later--still on the premises.  Will you look

it up now and send it?



Aldrich was here half an hour ago, like a breeze from over the fields,

with the fragrance still upon his spirit.  I am tired of waiting for that

man to get old.

                         Sincerely yours,

                                             S. L. C.





     Mark Twain was in his seventieth year, old neither in mind nor body,

     but willing to take life more quietly, to refrain from travel and

     gay events.  A sort of pioneers' reunion was to be held on the

     Pacific Coast, and a letter from Robert Fulton, of Reno, Nevada,

     invited Clemens to attend.  He did not go, but he sent a letter that

     we may believe was the next best thing to those who heard it read.





                    To Robert Fulton, in Reno, Nevada:



                                                  IN THE MOUNTAINS,

                                                       May 24, 1905.

DEAR MR. FULTON,--I remember, as if it were yesterday, that when I

disembarked from the overland stage in front of the Ormsby in Carson City

in August, 1861, I was not expecting to be asked to come again.  I was

tired, discouraged, white with alkali dust, and did not know anybody;

and if you had said then, "Cheer up, desolate stranger, don't be

down-hearted--pass on, and come again in 1905," you cannot think how

grateful I would have been and how gladly I would have closed the

contract. Although I was not expecting to be invited, I was watching out

for it, and was hurt and disappointed when you started to ask me and

changed it to, "How soon are you going away?"



But you have made it all right, now, the wound is closed.  And so I thank

you sincerely for the invitation; and with you, all Reno, and if I were a

few years younger I would accept it, and promptly.  I would go.  I would

let somebody else do the oration, but, as for me, I would talk

--just talk.  I would renew my youth; and talk--and talk--and talk

--and have the time of my life!  I would march the unforgotten and

unforgettable antiques by, and name their names, and give them reverent

Hailand-farewell as they passed: Goodman, McCarthy, Gillis, Curry,

Baldwin, Winters, Howard, Nye, Stewart; Neely Johnson, Hal Clayton,

North, Root,--and my brother, upon whom be peace!--and then the

desperadoes, who made life a joy and the "Slaughter-house" a precious

possession: Sam Brown, Farmer Pete, Bill Mayfield, Six-fingered Jake,

Jack Williams and the rest of the crimson discipleship--and so on and so

on.  Believe me, I would start a resurrection it would do you more good

to look at than the next one will, if you go on the way you are doing

now.



Those were the days! those old ones.  They will come no more.  Youth will

come no more.  They were so full to the brim with the wine of life; there

have been no others like them.  It chokes me up to think of them.  Would

you like me to come out there and cry?  It would not beseem my white

head.



Good-bye.  I drink to you all.  Have a good time--and take an old man's

blessing.

                    MARK TWAIN.





     A few days later he was writing to H. H. Bancroft, of San Francisco,

     who had invited him for a visit in event of his coming to the Coast.

     Henry James had just been there for a week and it was hoped that

     Howells would soon follow.





                   To H. H. Bancroft, in San Francisco:



                                                  UP IN NEW HAMPSHIRE,

                                                       May 27, 1905.

DEAR MR. BANCROFT,--I thank you sincerely for the tempting hospitalities

which you offer me, but I have to deny myself, for my wandering days are

over, and it is my desire and purpose to sit by the fire the rest of my

remnant of life and indulge myself with the pleasure and repose of work

--work uninterrupted and unmarred by duties or excursions.



A man who like me, is going to strike 70 on the 30th of next November has

no business to be flitting around the way Howells does--that shameless

old fictitious butter fly.  (But if he comes, don't tell him I said it,

for it would hurt him and I wouldn't brush a flake of powder from his

wing for anything.  I only say it in envy of his indestructible youth,

anyway.  Howells will be 88 in October.) With thanks again,

                              Sincerely yours,

                                        S. L. C.





     Clemens found that the air of the New Hampshire hills agreed with

     him and stimulated him to work.  He began an entirely new version of

     The Mysterious Stranger, of which he already had a bulky and nearly

     finished manuscript, written in Vienna.  He wrote several hundred

     pages of an extravaganza entitled, Three Thousand Years Among the

     Microbes, and then, having got his superabundant vitality reduced

     (it was likely to expend itself in these weird mental exploits),

     he settled down one day and wrote that really tender and beautiful

     idyl, Eve's Diary, which he had begun, or at least planned, the

     previous summer at Tyringham.  In a letter to Mr. Frederick A.

     Duneka, general manager of Harper & Brothers, he tells something of

     the manner of the story; also his revised opinion of Adam's Diary,

     written in '93, and originally published as a souvenir of Niagara

     Falls.





                  To Frederick A.  Duneka, in New York:



                                                  DUBLIN, July 16, '05.

DEAR MR. DUNEKA,--I wrote Eve's Diary, she using Adam's Diary as her

(unwitting and unconscious) text, of course, since to use any other text

would have been an imbecility--then I took Adam's Diary and read it.  It

turned my stomach.  It was not literature; yet it had been literature

once--before I sold it to be degraded to an advertisement of the Buffalo

Fair.  I was going to write and ask you to melt the plates and put it out

of print.



But this morning I examined it without temper, and saw that if I

abolished the advertisement it would be literature again.



So I have done it.  I have struck out 700 words and inserted 5 MS pages

of new matter (650 words), and now Adam's Diary is dam good--sixty times

as good as it ever was before.



I believe it is as good as Eve's Diary now--no, it's not quite that good,

I guess, but it is good enough to go in the same cover with Eve's.  I'm

sure of that.



I hate to have the old Adam go out any more--don't put it on the presses

again, let's put the new one in place of it; and next Xmas, let us bind

Adam and Eve in one cover.  They score points against each other--so, if

not bound together, some of the points would not be perceived.....



P. S.  Please send another Adam's Diary, so that I can make 2 revised

copies.  Eve's Diary is Eve's love-Story, but we will not name it that.

                                   Yrs ever,

                                                  MARK.





     The peace-making at Portsmouth between Japan and Russia was not

     satisfactory to Mark Twain, who had fondly hoped there would be no

     peace until, as he said, "Russian liberty was safe.  One more battle

     would have abolished the waiting chains of millions upon millions of

     unborn Russians and I wish it could have been fought."  He set down

     an expression of his feelings for the Associated Press, and it

     invited many letters.  Charles Francis Adams wrote, "It attracted my

     attention because it so exactly expresses the views I have myself

     all along entertained."



     Clemens was invited by Colonel George Harvey to dine with the

     Russian emissaries, Baron Rosen and Sergius Witte.  He declined, but

     his telegram so pleased Witte that he asked permission to publish

     it, and announced that he would show it to the Czar.





              Telegram.  To Col. George Harvey, in New York:



TO COLONEL HARVEY,--I am still a cripple, otherwise I should be more than

glad of this opportunity to meet the illustrious magicians who came here

equipped with nothing but a pen, and with it have divided the honors of

the war with the sword.  It is fair to presume that in thirty centuries

history will not get done admiring these men who attempted what the world

regarded as impossible and achieved it.



     Witte would not have cared to show the Czar the telegram in its

     original form, which follows.





     Telegram (unsent).  To Col. George Harvey, in New York:



TO COLONEL HARVEY,--I am still a cripple, otherwise I should be more than

glad of this opportunity to meet those illustrious magicians who with the

pen have annulled, obliterated, and abolished every high achievement of

the Japanese sword and turned the tragedy of a tremendous war into a gay

and blithesome comedy.  If I may, let me in all respect and honor salute

them as my fellow-humorists, I taking third place, as becomes one who was

not born to modesty, but by diligence and hard work is acquiring it.

                                                  MARK.



     Nor still another unsent form, perhaps more characteristic than

     either of the foregoing.



         Telegram (unsent).  To Col. George Harvey, in New York:



DEAR COLONEL,--No, this is a love-feast; when you call a lodge of sorrow

send for me.

                                                  MARK.





                       To Mrs. Crane, Quarry Farm:



                                             DUBLIN, Sept. 24, '05.

Susy dear, I have had a lovely dream.  Livy, dressed in black, was

sitting up in my bed (here) at my right and looking as young and sweet as

she used to do when she was in health.  She said: "what is the name of

your sweet sister?"  I said, "Pamela."  "Oh, yes, that is it, I thought

it was--" (naming a name which has escaped me) "Won't you write it down for

me?" I reached eagerly for a pen and pad--laid my hands upon both--then

said to myself, "It is only a dream," and turned back sorrowfully and

there she was, still.  The conviction flamed through me that our lamented

disaster was a dream, and this a reality.  I said, "How blessed it is,

how blessed it is, it was all a dream, only a dream!"  She only smiled

and did not ask what dream I meant, which surprised me.  She leaned her

head against mine and I kept saying, "I was perfectly sure it was a

dream, I never would have believed it wasn't."



I think she said several things, but if so they are gone from my memory.

I woke and did not know I had been dreaming.  She was gone.  I wondered

how she could go without my knowing it, but I did not spend any thought

upon that, I was too busy thinking of how vivid and real was the dream

that we had lost her and how unspeakably blessed it was to find that it

was not true and that she was still ours and with us.

                                                       S. L. C.





     One day that summer Mark Twain received a letter from the actress,

     Minnie Maddern Fiske, asking him to write something that would aid

     her in her crusade against bull-fighting.  The idea appealed to him;

     he replied at once.





                              To Mrs. Fiske:



DEAR MRS. FISKE,--I shall certainly write the story.  But I may not get

it to suit me, in which case it will go in the fire.  Later I will try

again--and yet again--and again.  I am used to this.  It has taken me

twelve years to write a short story--the shortest one I ever wrote, I

think.--[Probably "The Death Disk."]--So do not be discouraged; I will

stick to this one in the same way.  Sincerely yours,

                         S. L. CLEMENS.





     He did not delay in his beginning, and a few weeks later was sending

     word to his publisher about it.





                   To Frederick A. Duneka, in New York:



                                                  Oct.  2, '05.

DEAR MR. DUNEKA,--I have just finished a short story which I "greatly

admire," and so will you--"A Horse's Tale"--about 15,000 words, at a

rough guess.  It has good fun in it, and several characters, and is

lively.  I shall finish revising it in a few days or more, then Jean will

type it.



Don't you think you can get it into the Jan. and Feb. numbers and issue

it as a dollar booklet just after the middle of Jan. when you issue the

Feb. number?



It ought to be ably illustrated.



Why not sell simultaneous rights, for this once, to the Ladies' Home

Journal or Collier's, or both, and recoup yourself?--for I would like to

get it to classes that can't afford Harper's.  Although it doesn't

preach, there's a sermon concealed in it.

                              Yr sincerely,

                                             MARK.





     Five days later he added some rather interesting facts concerning

     the new story.





                      To F. A. Duneka, in New York:



                                        Oct.  7, 1906. ['05]

DEAR MR.  DUNEKA,--.....  I've made a poor guess as to number of words.

I think there must be 20,000.  My usual page of MS. contains about 130

words; but when I am deeply interested in my work and dead to everything

else, my hand-writing shrinks and shrinks until there's a great deal more

than 130 on a page--oh, yes, a deal more.  Well, I discover, this

morning, that this tale is written in that small hand.



This strong interest is natural, for the heroine is my daughter, Susy,

whom we lost.  It was not intentional--it was a good while before I found

it out.



So I am sending you her picture to use--and to reproduce with

photographic exactness the unsurpassable expression and all.  May you

find an artist who has lost an idol!



Take as good care of the picture as you can and restore it to me when I

come.



I hope you will illustrate this tale considerably.  Not humorous

pictures.  No.  When they are good (or bad) one's humor gets no chance to

play surprises on the reader.  A humorous subject illustrated seriously

is all right, but a humorous artist is no fit person for such work.  You

see, the humorous writer pretends to absolute seriousness (when he knows

his trade) then for an artist--to step in and give his calculated gravity

all away with a funny picture--oh, my land!  It gives me the dry gripes

just to think of it.  It would be just about up to the average comic

artist's intellectual level to make a funny picture of the horse kicking

the lungs out of a trader.  Hang it, the remark is funny--because the

horse is not aware of it but the fact is not humorous, it is tragic and

it is no subject for a humorous picture.



Could I be allowed to sit in judgment upon the pictures before they are

accepted--at least those in which Cathy may figure?



This is not essential.  It is but a suggestion, and it is hereby

withdrawn, if it would be troublesome or cause delay.



I hope you will reproduce the cat-pile, full page.  And save the photo

for me in as good condition as possible.  When Susy and Clara were little

tots those cats had their profoundest worship, and there is no duplicate

of this picture.  These cats all had thundering names, or inappropriate

ones--furnished by the children with my help.  One was named Buffalo

Bill.



Are you interested in coincidences?



After discovering, about the middle of the book, that Cathy was Susy

Clemens, I put her picture with my MS., to be reproduced.  After the book

was finished it was discovered that Susy had a dim model of Soldier Boy

in her arms; I had forgotten all about that toy.



Then I examined the cat-picture and laid it with the MS. for

introduction; but it was not until yesterday that I remembered that one

of the cats was named Buffalo Bill.

                              Sincerely yours,

                                                  MARK.





     The reference in this letter to shrinkage of his hand-writing with

     the increasing intensity of his interest, and the consequent

     addition of the number of words to the page, recalls another fact,

     noted by Mr. Duneka, viz.: that because of his terse Anglo-Saxon

     diction, Mark Twain could put more words on a magazine page than any

     other writer.  It is hardly necessary to add that he got more force

     into what he put on the page for the same reason.



     There was always a run of reporters at Mark Twain's New York home.

     His opinion was sought for on every matter of public interest, and

     whatever happened to him in particular was considered good for at

     least half a column of copy, with his name as a catch-line at the

     top.  When it was learned that he was to spend the summer in New

     Hampshire, the reporters had all wanted to find out about it.  Now

     that the summer was ending, they began to want to know how he had

     liked it, what work he had done and what were his plans for another

     year.  As they frequently applied to his publishers for these

     details it was finally suggested to him that he write a letter

     furnishing the required information.  His reply, handed to Mr.

     Duneka, who was visiting him at the moment, is full of interest.





                          Mem.  for Mr. Duneka:



                                                  DUBLIN, Oct. 9, 1905.

.....As to the other matters, here are the details.



Yes, I have tried a number of summer homes, here and in Europe together.



Each of these homes had charms of its own; charms and delights of its

own, and some of them--even in Europe had comforts.  Several of them had

conveniences, too.  They all had a "view."



It is my conviction that there should always be some water in a view

--a lake or a river, but not the ocean, if you are down on its level.  I

think that when you are down on its level it seldom inflames you with an

ecstasy which you could not get out of a sand-flat.  It is like being on

board ship, over again; indeed it is worse than that, for there's three

months of it.  On board ship one tires of the aspects in a couple of

days, and quits looking.  The same vast circle of heaving humps is spread

around you all the time, with you in the centre of it and never gaining

an inch on the horizon, so far as you can see; for variety, a flight of

flying-fish, mornings; a flock of porpoises throwing summersaults

afternoons; a remote whale spouting, Sundays; occasional phosphorescent

effects, nights; every other day a streak of black smoke trailing along

under the horizon; on the one single red letter day, the illustrious

iceberg.  I have seen that iceberg thirty-four times in thirty-seven

voyages; it is always the same shape, it is always the same size, it

always throws up the same old flash when the sun strikes it; you may set

it on any New York door-step of a June morning and light it up with a

mirror-flash; and I will engage to recognize it.  It is artificial, and

it is provided and anchored out by the steamer companies.  I used to like

the sea, but I was young then, and could easily get excited over any kind

of monotony, and keep it up till the monotonies ran out, if it was a

fortnight.



Last January, when we were beginning to inquire about a home for this

summer, I remembered that Abbott Thayer had said, three years before,

that the New Hampshire highlands was a good place.  He was right--it was

a good place.  Any place that is good for an artist in paint is good for

an artist in morals and ink.  Brush is here, too; so is Col. T. W.

Higginson; so is Raphael Pumpelly; so is Mr. Secretary Hitchcock; so is

Henderson; so is Learned; so is Summer; so is Franklin MacVeigh; so is

Joseph L. Smith; so is Henry Copley Greene, when I am not occupying his

house, which I am doing this season.  Paint, literature, science,

statesmanship, history, professorship, law, morals,--these are all

represented here, yet crime is substantially unknown.



The summer homes of these refugees are sprinkled, a mile apart, among the

forest-clad hills, with access to each other by firm smooth country roads

which are so embowered in dense foliage that it is always twilight in

there, and comfortable.  The forests are spider-webbed with these good

roads, they go everywhere; but for the help of the guide-boards, the

stranger would not arrive anywhere.



The village--Dublin--is bunched together in its own place, but a good

telephone service makes its markets handy to all those outliars.  I have

spelt it that way to be witty.  The village executes orders on, the

Boston plan--promptness and courtesy.



The summer homes are high-perched, as a rule, and have contenting

outlooks.  The house we occupy has one.  Monadnock, a soaring double

hump, rises into the sky at its left elbow--that is to say, it is close

at hand.  From the base of the long slant of the mountain the valley

spreads away to the circling frame of the hills, and beyond the frame the

billowy sweep of remote great ranges rises to view and flows, fold upon

fold, wave upon wave, soft and blue and unwordly, to the horizon fifty

miles away.  In these October days Monadnock and the valley and its

framing hills make an inspiring picture to look at, for they are

sumptuously splashed and mottled and be-torched from sky-line to sky-line

with the richest dyes the autumn can furnish; and when they lie flaming

in the full drench of the mid-afternoon sun, the sight affects the

spectator physically, it stirs his blood like military music.



These summer homes are commodious, well built, and well furnished--facts

which sufficiently indicate that the owners built them to live in

themselves.  They have furnaces and wood fireplaces, and the rest of the

comforts and conveniences of a city home, and can be comfortably occupied

all the year round.



We cannot have this house next season, but I have secured Mrs. Upton's

house which is over in the law and science quarter, two or three miles

from here, and about the same distance from the art, literary, and

scholastic groups.  The science and law quarter has needed improving,

this good while.



The nearest railway-station is distant something like an hour's drive; it

is three hours from there to Boston, over a branch line.  You can go to

New York in six hours per branch lines if you change cars every time you

think of it, but it is better to go to Boston and stop over and take the

trunk line next day, then you do not get lost.



It is claimed that the atmosphere of the New Hampshire highlands is

exceptionally bracing and stimulating, and a fine aid to hard and

continuous work.  It is a just claim, I think.  I came in May, and

wrought 35 successive days without a break.  It is possible that I could

not have done it elsewhere.  I do not know; I have not had any

disposition to try it, before.  I think I got the disposition out of the

atmosphere, this time.  I feel quite sure, in fact, that that is where it

came from.



I am ashamed to confess what an intolerable pile of manuscript I ground

out in the 35 days, therefore I will keep the number of words to myself.

I wrote the first half of a long tale--"The Adventures of a Microbe" and

put it away for a finish next summer, and started another long tale--"The

Mysterious Stranger;" I wrote the first half of it and put it with the

other for a finish next summer.  I stopped, then.  I was not tired, but I

had no books on hand that needed finishing this year except one that was

seven years old.  After a little I took that one up and finished it.  Not

for publication, but to have it ready for revision next summer.



Since I stopped work I have had a two months' holiday.  The summer has

been my working time for 35 years; to have a holiday in it (in America)

is new for me.  I have not broken it, except to write "Eve's Diary" and

"A Horse's Tale"--short things occupying the mill 12 days.



This year our summer is 6 months long and ends with November and the

flight home to New York, but next year we hope and expect to stretch it

another month and end it the first of December.



                             [No signature.]





     The fact that he was a persistent smoker was widely known, and many

     friends and admirers of Mark Twain sent him cigars, most of which he

     could not use, because they were too good.  He did not care for

     Havana cigars, but smoked the fragrant, inexpensive domestic tobacco

     with plenty of "pep" in it, as we say today.  Now and then he had an

     opportunity to head off some liberal friend, who wrote asking

     permission to contribute to his cigar collection, as instance the

     following.





                To Rev. L. M. Powers, in Haverhill, Mass.:



                                                  Nov. 9, 1905.

DEAR MR. POWERS,--I should accept your hospitable offer at once but for

the fact I couldn't do it and remain honest.  That is to say if I allowed

you to send me what you believe to be good cigars it would distinctly

mean that I meant to smoke them, whereas I should do nothing of the kind.

I know a good cigar better than you do, for I have had 60 years

experience.



No, that is not what I mean; I mean I know a bad cigar better than

anybody else; I judge by the price only; if it costs above 5 cents I know

it to be either foreign or half-foreign, and unsmokeable.  By me.  I have

many boxes of Havana cigars, of all prices from 20 cts apiece up to 1.66

apiece; I bought none of them, they were all presents, they are an

accumulation of several years.  I have never smoked one of them and never

shall, I work them off on the visitor.  You shall have a chance when you

come.



Pessimists are born not made; optimists are born not made; but no man is

born either pessimist wholly or optimist wholly, perhaps; he is

pessimistic along certain lines and optimistic along certain others.

That is my case.

                    Sincerely yours,

                              S. L. CLEMENS.





     In spite of all the fine photographs that were made of him, there

     recurred constantly among those sent him to be autographed a print

     of one which, years before, Sarony had made and placed on public

     sale.  It was a good photograph, mechanically and even artistically,

     but it did not please Mark Twain.  Whenever he saw it he recalled

     Sarony with bitterness and severity.  Once he received an inquiry

     concerning it, and thus feelingly expressed himself.





                         To Mr. Row (no address):



                                             21 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK,

                                                  November 14, 1905.

DEAR MR. ROW,--That alleged portrait has a private history.  Sarony was

as much of an enthusiast about wild animals as he was about photography;

and when Du Chaillu brought the first Gorilla to this country in 1819 he

came to me in a fever of excitement and asked me if my father was of

record and authentic.  I said he was; then Sarony, without any abatement

of his excitement asked if my grandfather also was of record and

authentic.  I said he was.  Then Sarony, with still rising excitement and

with joy added to it, said he had found my great grandfather in the

person of the gorilla, and had recognized him at once by his resemblance

to me.  I was deeply hurt but did not reveal this, because I knew Saxony

meant no offense for the gorilla had not done him any harm, and he was

not a man who would say an unkind thing about a gorilla wantonly.  I went

with him to inspect the ancestor, and examined him from several points of

view, without being able to detect anything more than a passing

resemblance.  "Wait," said Sarony with confidence, "let me show you."

He borrowed my overcoat--and put it on the gorilla.  The result was

surprising.  I saw that the gorilla while not looking distinctly like me

was exactly what my great grand father would have looked like if I had

had one.  Sarong photographed the creature in that overcoat, and spread

the picture about the world.  It has remained spread about the world ever

since.  It turns up every week in some newspaper somewhere or other.  It

is not my favorite, but to my exasperation it is everybody else's.

Do you think you could get it suppressed for me?  I will pay the limit.

                              Sincerely yours,

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.





     The year 1905 closed triumphantly for Mark Twain.  The great

     "Seventieth Birthday" dinner planned by Colonel George Harvey is

     remembered to-day as the most notable festival occasion in New York

     literary history.  Other dinners and ovations followed.  At seventy

     he had returned to the world, more beloved, more honored than ever

     before.









XLV



LETTERS, 1906, TO VARIOUS PERSONS.  THE FAREWELL LECTURE.  A SECOND

SUMMER IN DUBLIN.  BILLIARDS AND COPYRIGHT



     MARK TWAIN at "Pier Seventy," as he called it, paused to look

     backward and to record some memoirs of his long, eventful past.  The

     Autobiography dictations begun in Florence were resumed, and daily

     he traveled back, recalling long-ago scenes and all-but-forgotten

     places.  He was not without reminders.  Now and again there came

     some message that brought back the old days--the Tom Sawyer and Huck

     Finn days--or the romance of the river that he never recalled other

     than with tenderness and a tone of regret that it was gone.  An

     invitation to the golden wedding of two ancient friends moved and

     saddened him, and his answer to it conveys about all the story of

     life.





                         To Mr. and Mrs. Gordon:



                                                       21 FIFTH AVENUE,

                                                       Jan. 24, '06.

DEAR GORDONS,--I have just received your golden-wedding "At Home" and am

trying to adjust my focus to it and realize how much it means.  It is

inconceivable!  With a simple sweep it carries me back over a stretch of

time measurable only in astronomical terms and geological periods.

It brings before me Mrs. Gordon, young, round-limbed, handsome; and with

her the Youngbloods and their two babies, and Laura Wright, that

unspoiled little maid, that fresh flower of the woods and the prairies.

Forty-eight years ago!



Life was a fairy-tale, then, it is a tragedy now.  When I was 43 and John

Hay 41 he said life was a tragedy after 40, and I disputed it.  Three

years ago he asked me to testify again: I counted my graves, and there

was nothing for me to say.



I am old; I recognize it but I don't realize it.  I wonder if a person

ever really ceases to feel young--I mean, for a whole day at a time.  My

love to you both, and to all of us that are left.

                                                  MARK.





     Though he used very little liquor of any kind, it was Mark Twain's

     custom to keep a bottle of Scotch whiskey with his collection of

     pipes and cigars and tobacco on a little table by his bed-side.

     During restless nights he found a small quantity of it conducive to

     sleep.  Andrew Carnegie, learning of this custom, made it his

     business to supply Scotch of his own special importation.  The first

     case came, direct from Scotland.  When it arrived Clemens sent this

     characteristic acknowledgment.





                     To Andrew Carnegie, in Scotland:



                                        21 FIFTH AVE.  Feb. 10, '06.

DEAR ST. ANDREW,--The whisky arrived in due course from over the water;

last week one bottle of it was extracted from the wood and inserted into

me, on the instalment plan, with this result: that I believe it to be the

best, smoothest whisky now on the planet.  Thanks, oh, thanks: I have

discarded Peruna.



Hoping that you three are well and happy and will be coming back before

the winter sets in.

                         I am,

                              Sincerely yours,

                                        MARK.





     It must have been a small bottle to be consumed by him in a week, or

     perhaps he had able assistance.  The next brief line refers to the

     manuscript of his article, "Saint Joan of Arc," presented to the

     museum at Rouen.





                           To Edward E. Clarke:



                                             21 FIFTH AVE., Feb., 1906.

DEAR SIR,--I have found the original manuscript and with great pleasure I

transmit it herewith, also a printed copy.



It is a matter of great pride to me to have any word of mine concerning

the world's supremest heroine honored by a place in that Museum.

                         Sincerely yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     The series of letters which follows was prepared by Mark Twain and

     General Fred Grant, mainly with a view of advertising the lecture

     that Clemens had agreed to deliver for the benefit of the Robert

     Fulton Monument Association.  It was, in fact, to be Mark Twain's

     "farewell lecture," and the association had really proposed to pay

     him a thousand dollars for it.  The exchange of these letters,

     however, was never made outside of Mark Twain's bed-room.  Propped

     against the pillows, pen in hand, with General Grant beside him,

     they arranged the series with the idea of publication.  Later the

     plan was discarded, so that this pleasant foolery appears here for

     the first, time.





                         PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL



                             (Correspondence)



                                 Telegram



                                             Army Headquarters (date)

MARK TWAIN, New York,--Would you consider a proposal to talk at Carnegie

Hall for the benefit of the Robert Fulton Monument Association, of which

you are a Vice President, for a fee of a thousand dollars?

                                        F. D. GRANT,

                                             President,

                                   Fulton Monument Association.





                           Telegraphic Answer:



MAJOR-GENERAL F. D. GRANT, Army Headquarters,--I shall be glad to do it,

but I must stipulate that you keep the thousand dollars and add it to the

Monument fund as my contribution.

                                        CLEMENS.





Letters:



DEAR MR. CLEMENS,--You have the thanks of the Association, and the terms

shall be as you say.  But why give all of it?  Why not reserve a portion

--why should you do this work wholly without compensation?

                                   Truly yours

                                        FRED. D. GRANT.





MAJOR GENERAL GRANT, Army Headquarters.



DEAR GENERAL,--Because I stopped talking for pay a good many years ago,

and I could not resume the habit now without a great deal of personal

discomfort.  I love to hear myself talk, because I get so much

instruction and moral upheaval out of it, but I lose the bulk of this joy

when I charge for it.  Let the terms stand.



General, if I have your approval, I wish to use this good occasion to

retire permanently from the platform.

                                   Truly yours

                                             S. L. CLEMENS.





DEAR MR. CLEMENS,--Certainly.  But as an old friend, permit me to say,

Don't do that.  Why should you?--you are not old yet.

                              Yours truly,

                                        FRED D. GRANT.





DEAR GENERAL,--I mean the pay-platform; I shan't retire from the

gratis-platform until after I am dead and courtesy requires me to keep

still and not disturb the others.



What shall I talk about?  My idea is this: to instruct the audience about

Robert Fulton, and.....  Tell me--was that his real name, or was it his

nom de plume?  However, never mind, it is not important--I can skip it,

and the house will think I knew all about it, but forgot.  Could you find

out for me if he was one of the Signers of the Declaration, and which

one?  But if it is any trouble, let it alone, I can skip it.  Was he out

with Paul Jones?  Will you ask Horace Porter?  And ask him if he brought

both of them home.  These will be very interesting facts, if they can be

established.  But never mind, don't trouble Porter, I can establish them

anyway.  The way I look at it, they are historical gems--gems of the very

first water.



Well, that is my idea, as I have said: first, excite the audience with a

spoonful of information about Fulton, then quiet down with a barrel of

illustration drawn by memory from my books--and if you don't say anything

the house will think they never heard of it before, because people don't

really read your books, they only say they do, to keep you from feeling

bad.  Next, excite the house with another spoonful of Fultonian fact,

then tranquilize them again with another barrel of illustration.  And so

on and so on, all through the evening; and if you are discreet and don't

tell them the illustrations don't illustrate anything, they won't notice

it and I will send them home as well-informed about Robert Fulton as I am

myself.  Don't be afraid; I know all about audiences, they believe

everything you say, except when you are telling the truth.

                    Truly yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.



P.S.  Mark all the advertisements "Private and Confidential," otherwise

the people will not read them.

                                   M. T.





DEAR MR. CLEMENS,--How long shall you talk?  I ask in order that we may

be able to say when carriages may be called.

                    Very Truly yours,

                              HUGH GORDON MILLER,

                                        Secretary.





DEAR MR.  MILLER,--I cannot say for sure.  It is my custom to keep on

talking till I get the audience cowed.  Sometimes it takes an hour and

fifteen minutes, sometimes I can do it in an hour.

                              Sincerely yours,

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.



Mem.  My charge is 2 boxes free.  Not the choicest--sell the choicest,

and give me any 6-seat boxes you please.

                                        S. L. C.



I want Fred Grant (in uniform) on the stage; also the rest of the

officials of the Association; also other distinguished people--all the

attractions we can get.  Also, a seat for Mr. Albert Bigelow Paine, who

may be useful to me if he is near me and on the front.

                                        S. L. C.





     The seat chosen for the writer of these notes was to be at the front

     of the stage in order that the lecturer might lean over now and then

     and pretend to be asking information concerning Fulton.  I was not

     entirely happy in the thought of this showy honor, and breathed more

     freely when this plan was abandoned and the part assigned to General

     Grant.



     The lecture was given in Carnegie Hall, which had been gayly

     decorated for the occasion.  The house was more than filled, and a

     great sum of money was realized for the fund.



     It was that spring that Gorky and Tchaikowski, the Russian

     revolutionists, came to America hoping to arouse interest in their

     cause.  The idea of the overthrow of the Russian dynasty was

     pleasant to Mark Twain.  Few things would have given him greater

     comfort than to have known that a little more than ten years would

     see the downfall of Russian imperialism.  The letter which follows

     was a reply to an invitation from Tchaikowski, urging him to speak

     at one of the meetings.





DEAR MR. TCHAIKOWSKI,--I thank you for the honor of the invitation, but

I am not able to accept it, because on Thursday evening I shall be

presiding at a meeting whose object is to find remunerative work for

certain classes of our blind who would gladly support themselves if they

had the opportunity.



My sympathies are with the Russian revolution, of course.  It goes

without saying.  I hope it will succeed, and now that I have talked with

you I take heart to believe it will.  Government by falsified promises;

by lies, by treacheries, and by the butcher-knife for the aggrandizement

of a single family of drones and its idle and vicious kin has been borne

quite long enough in Russia, I should think, and it is to be hoped that

the roused nation, now rising in its strength, will presently put an end

to it and set up the republic in its place.  Some of us, even of the

white headed, may live to see the blessed day when Czars and Grand Dukes

will be as scarce there as I trust they are in heaven.

                         Most sincerely yours,

                                                  MARK TWAIN.





     There came another summer at Dublin, New Hampshire, this time in the

     fine Upton residence on the other slope of Monadnock, a place of

     equally beautiful surroundings, and an even more extended view.

     Clemens was at this time working steadily on his so-called

     Autobiography, which was not that, in fact, but a series of

     remarkable chapters, reminiscent, reflective, commentative, written

     without any particular sequence as to time or subject-matter.  He

     dictated these chapters to a stenographer, usually in the open air,

     sitting in a comfortable rocker or pacing up and down the long

     veranda that faced a vast expanse of wooded slope and lake and

     distant blue mountains.  It became one of the happiest occupations

     of his later years.





                       To W. D. Howells, in Maine:



                                   DUBLIN, Sunday, June 17, '06.

DEAR HOWELLS,--..... The dictating goes lazily and pleasantly on.  With

intervals.  I find that I have been at it, off and on, nearly two hours a

day for 155 days, since Jan. 9.  To be exact I've dictated 75 hours in 80

days and loafed 75 days.  I've added 60,000 words in the month that I've

been here; which indicates that I've dictated during 20 days of that

time--40 hours, at an average of 1,500 words an hour.  It's a plenty, and

I am satisfied.



There's a good deal of "fat" I've dictated, (from Jan. 9) 210,000 words,

and the "fat" adds about 50,000 more.



The "fat" is old pigeon-holed things, of the years gone by, which I or

editors didn't das't to print.  For instance, I am dumping in the little

old book which I read to you in Hartford about 30 years ago and which you

said "publish--and ask Dean Stanley to furnish an introduction; he'll do

it."  ("Captain Stormfield's Visit to Heaven.") It reads quite to suit

me, without altering a word, now that it isn't to see print until I am

dead.



To-morrow I mean to dictate a chapter which will get my heirs and assigns

burnt alive if they venture to print it this side of 2006 A.D.--which I

judge they won't.  There'll be lots of such chapters if I live 3 or 4

years longer.  The edition of A.D. 2006 will make a stir when it comes

out.  I shall be hovering around taking notice, along with other dead

pals.  You are invited.

                                   MARK.



     His tendency to estimate the measure of the work he was doing, and

     had completed, must have clung to him from his old printer days.



     The chapter which was to get his heirs and assigns burned alive was

     on the orthodox God, and there was more than one such chapter.  In

     the next letter he refers to two exquisite poems by Howells, and the

     writer of these notes recalls his wonderful reading of them aloud.

     'In Our Town' was a collection of short stories then recently issued

     by William Allen White.  Howells had recommended them.





                       To W. D. Howells, in Maine:



                                             21 FIFTH AVE., Tuesday Eve.

DEAR HOWELLS,--It is lovely of you to say those beautiful things--I don't

know how to thank you enough.  But I love you, that I know.



I read "After the Wedding" aloud and we felt all the pain of it and the

truth.  It was very moving and very beautiful--would have been

over-comingly moving, at times, but for the haltings and pauses compelled

by the difficulties of MS--these were a protection, in that they

furnished me time to brace up my voice, and get a new start.  Jean wanted

to keep the MS for another reading-aloud, and for "keeps," too, I

suspected, but I said it would be safest to write you about it.



I like "In Our Town," particularly that Colonel, of the Lookout Mountain

Oration, and very particularly pages 212-16.  I wrote and told White so.



After "After the Wedding" I read "The Mother" aloud and sounded its human

deeps with your deep-sea lead.  I had not read it before, since it was

first published.



I have been dictating some fearful things, for 4 successive mornings--for

no eye but yours to see until I have been dead a century--if then.  But

I got them out of my system, where they had been festering for years--and

that was the main thing.  I feel better, now.



I came down today on business--from house to house in 12 1/2 hours, and

expected to arrive dead, but am neither tired nor sleepy.

                         Yours as always

                                             MARK.





                To William Allen White, in Emporia, Kans.:



                                             DUBLIN, NEW HAMPSHIRE,

                                                  June 24, 1906.

DEAR MR. WHITE,--Howells told me that "In Our Town" was a charming book,

and indeed it is.  All of it is delightful when read one's self, parts of

it can score finely when subjected to the most exacting of tests--the

reading aloud.  Pages 197 and 216 are of that grade.  I have tried them a

couple of times on the family, and pages 212 and 216 are qualified to

fetch any house of any country, caste or color, endowed with those riches

which are denied to no nation on the planet--humor and feeling.



Talk again--the country is listening.

                              Sincerely yours,

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.





     Witter Bynner, the poet, was one of the editors of McClure's

     Magazine at this time, but was trying to muster the courage to give

     up routine work for verse-making and the possibility of poverty.

     Clemens was fond of Bynner and believed in his work.  He did not

     advise him, however, to break away entirely from a salaried

     position--at least not immediately; but one day Bynner did so, and

     reported the step he had taken, with some doubt as to the answer he

     would receive.





                      To Witter Bynner, in New York:



                                                  DUBLIN, Oct. 5, 1906.

DEAR POET,--You have certainly done right for several good reasons; at

least, of them, I can name two:



1.  With your reputation you can have your freedom and yet earn your

living.   2. if you fall short of succeeding to your wish, your

reputation will provide you another job.  And so in high approval I

suppress the scolding and give you the saintly and fatherly pat instead.

                                                  MARK TWAIN.





     On another occasion, when Bynner had written a poem to Clara

     Clemens, her father pretended great indignation that the first poem

     written by Bynner to any one in his household should not be to him,

     and threatened revenge.  At dinner shortly after he produced from

     his pocket a slip of paper on which he had set down what he said was

     "his only poem."  He read the lines that follow:



               "Of all sad words of tongue or pen,

               The saddest are these: It might have been.

               Ah, say not so! as life grows longer, leaner, thinner,

               We recognize, O God, it might have Bynner!"



     He returned to New York in October and soon after was presented by

     Mrs. H. H. Rogers with a handsome billiard-table.



     He had a passion for the game, but had played comparatively little

     since the old Hartford days of fifteen years before, when a group of

     his friends used to assemble on Friday nights in the room at the top

     of the house for long, strenuous games and much hilarity.  Now the

     old fever all came back; the fascinations of the game superseded

     even his interest in the daily dictations.





                    To Mrs. H. H. Rogers, in New York:



                                   21 FIFTH AVENUE, Monday, Nov., 1906.

DEAR MRS. ROGERS,--The billiard table is better than the doctors.  It is

driving out the heartburn in a most promising way.  I have a billiardist

on the premises, and I walk not less than ten miles every day with the

cue in my hand.  And the walking is not the whole of the exercise, nor

the most health-giving part of it, I think.  Through the multitude of the

positions and attitudes it brings into play every muscle in the body and

exercises them all.



The games begin right after luncheon, daily, and continue until midnight,

with 2 hours' intermission for dinner and music.  And so it is 9 hours'

exercise per day, and 10 or 12 on Sunday.  Yesterday and last night it

was 12--and I slept until 8 this morning without waking.  The billiard

table, as a Sabbath breaker can beat any coal-breaker in Pennsylvania,

and give it 30 in, the game.  If Mr. Rogers will take to daily billiards

he can do without doctors and the massageur, I think.



We are really going to build a house on my farm, an hour and a half from

New York.  It is decided.  It is to be built by contract, and is to come

within $25,000.

                    With love and many thanks.

                                             S. L. C.



P.S.  Clara is in the sanitarium--till January 28 when her western

concert tour will begin.  She is getting to be a mighty competent singer.

You must know Clara better; she is one of the very finest and completest

and most satisfactory characters I have ever met.  Others knew it before,

but I have always been busy with other matters.





     The "billiardist on the premises" was the writer of these notes,

     who, earlier in the year, had become his biographer, and, in the

     course of time, his daily companion and friend.  The farm mentioned

     was one which he had bought at Redding, Connecticut, where, later,

     he built the house known as "Stormfield."



     Henry Mills Alden, for nearly forty years editor of Harper's

     Magazine, arrived at his seventieth birthday on November 11th that

     year, and Harper & Brothers had arranged to give him a great dinner

     in the offices of Franklin Square, where, for half a century, he had

     been an active force.  Mark Twain, threatened with a cold, and

     knowing the dinner would be strenuous, did not feel able to attend,

     so wrote a letter which, if found suitable, could be read at the

     gathering.





                           To Mr. Henry Alden:



ALDEN,--dear and ancient friend--it is a solemn moment.  You have now

reached the age of discretion.  You have been a long time arriving.  Many

years ago you docked me on an article because the subject was too old;

later, you docked me on an article because the subject was too new; later

still, you docked me on an article because the subject was betwixt and

between.  Once, when I wrote a Letter to Queen Victoria, you did not put

it in the respectable part of the Magazine, but interred it in that

potter's field, the Editor's Drawer.  As a result, she never answered it.

How often we recall, with regret, that Napoleon once shot at a magazine

editor and missed him and killed a publisher.  But we remember, with

charity, that his intentions were good.



You will reform, now, Alden.  You will cease from these economies, and

you will be discharged.  But in your retirement you will carry with you

the admiration and earnest good wishes of the oppressed and toiling

scribes.  This will be better than bread.  Let this console you when the

bread fails.



You will carry with you another thing, too--the affection of the scribes;

for they all love you in spite of your crimes.  For you bear a kind heart

in your breast, and the sweet and winning spirit that charms away all

hostilities and animosities, and makes of your enemy your friend and

keeps him so.  You have reigned over us thirty-six years, and, please

God, you shall reign another thirty-six--"and peace to Mahmoud on his

golden throne!"

                    Always yours

                                   MARK





     A copyright bill was coming up in Washington and a delegation of

     authors went down to work for it.  Clemens was not the head of the

     delegation, but he was the most prominent member of it, as well as

     the most useful.  He invited the writer to accompany him, and

     elsewhere I have told in detail the story of that excursion,--[See

     Mark Twain; A Biography, chap.  ccli,]--which need be but briefly

     touched upon here.



     His work was mainly done aside from that of the delegation.  They

     had him scheduled for a speech, however, which he made without notes

     and with scarcely any preparation.  Meantime he had applied to

     Speaker Cannon for permission to allow him on the floor of the

     House, where he could buttonhole the Congressmen.  He was not

     eligible to the floor without having received the thanks of

     Congress, hence the following letter:





             To Hon. Joseph Cannon, House of Representatives:



                                                       Dec. 7, 1906.

DEAR UNCLE JOSEPH,--Please get me the thanks of the Congress--not next

week but right away.  It is very necessary.  Do accomplish this for your

affectionate old friend right away; by persuasion, if you can, by

violence if you must, for it is imperatively necessary that I get on the

floor for two or three hours and talk to the members, man by man, in

behalf of the support, encouragement and protection of one of the

nation's most valuable assets and industries--its literature.  I have

arguments with me, also a barrel, with liquid in it.



Give me a chance.  Get me the thanks of Congress.  Don't wait for others;

there isn't time.  I have stayed away and let Congress alone for

seventy-one years and I am entitled to thanks.  Congress knows it

perfectly well and I have long felt hurt that this quite proper and

earned expression of gratitude has been merely felt by the House and

never publicly uttered. Send me an order on the Sergeant-at-Arms quick.

When shall I come?  With love and a benediction.

                              MARK TWAIN.





     This was mainly a joke.  Mark Twain did not expect any "thanks," but

     he did hope for access to the floor, which once, in an earlier day,

     had been accorded him.  We drove to the Capitol and he delivered his

     letter to "Uncle Joe" by hand.  "Uncle Joe" could not give him the

     privilege of the floor; the rules had become more stringent.  He

     declared they would hang him if he did such a thing.  He added that

     he had a private room down-stairs, where Mark Twain might establish

     headquarters, and that he would assign his colored servant, Neal, of

     long acquaintanceship with many of the members, to pass the word

     that Mark Twain was receiving.



     The result was a great success.  All that afternoon members of

     Congress poured into the Speaker's room and, in an atmosphere blue

     with tobacco smoke, Mark Twain talked the gospel of copyright to his

     heart's content.



     The bill did not come up for passage that session, but Mark Twain

     lived to see his afternoon's lobbying bring a return.  In 1909,

     Champ Clark, and those others who had gathered around him that

     afternoon, passed a measure that added fourteen years to the

     copyright term.



     The next letter refers to a proposed lobby of quite a different

     sort.





                   To Helen Keller, in Wrentham, Mass.:



                                                       21 FIFTH AVENUE,

                                                       Dec.  23, '06.

DEAR HELEN KELLER,--.  .  .  You say, "As a reformer, you know that

ideas must be driven home again and again."



Yes, I know it; and by old experience I know that speeches and documents

and public meetings are a pretty poor and lame way of accomplishing it.

Last year I proposed a sane way--one which I had practiced with success

for a quarter of a century--but I wasn't expecting it to get any

attention, and it didn't.



Give me a battalion of 200 winsome young girls and matrons, and let me

tell them what to do and how to do it, and I will be responsible for

shining results.  If I could mass them on the stage in front of the

audience and instruct them there, I could make a public meeting take hold

of itself and do something really valuable for once.  Not that the real

instruction would be done there, for it wouldn't; it would be previously

done privately, and merely repeated there.



But it isn't going to happen--the good old way will be stuck to: there'll

be a public meeting: with music, and prayer, and a wearying report, and a

verbal description of the marvels the blind can do, and 17 speeches--then

the call upon all present who are still alive, to contribute.  This hoary

program was invented in the idiot asylum, and will never be changed.  Its

function is to breed hostility to good causes.



Some day somebody will recruit my 200--my dear beguilesome Knights of the

Golden Fleece--and you will see them make good their ominous name.



Mind, we must meet! not in the grim and ghastly air of the platform,

mayhap, but by the friendly fire--here at 21.

                         Affectionately your friend,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     They did meet somewhat later that winter in the friendly parlors of

     No. 21, and friends gathered in to meet the marvelous blind girl and

     to pay tribute to Miss Sullivan (Mrs. Macy) for her almost

     incredible achievement.













MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS  1907-1910



ARRANGED WITH COMMENT BY ALBERT BIGELOW PAINE







VOLUME VI.





XLVI



LETTERS 1907-08.  A DEGREE FROM OXFORD.  THE NEW HOME AT REDDING



     The author, J. Howard Moore, sent a copy of his book, The Universal

     Kinship, with a letter in which he said: "Most humorists have no

     anxiety except to glorify themselves and add substance to their

     pocket-books by making their readers laugh.  You have shown, on many

     occasions, that your mission is not simply to antidote the

     melancholy of a world, but includes a real and intelligent concern

     for the general welfare of your fellowman."



     The Universal Kinship was the kind of a book that Mark Twain

     appreciated, as his acknowledgment clearly shows.





                         To Mr. J. Howard Moore:



                                                       Feb. 2, '07.

DEAR MR. MOORE, The book has furnished me several days of deep pleasure

and satisfaction; it has compelled my gratitude at the same time, since

it saves me the labor of stating my own long-cherished opinions and

reflections and resentments by doing it lucidly and fervently and

irascibly for me.



There is one thing that always puzzles me: as inheritors of the mentality

of our reptile ancestors we have improved the inheritance by a thousand

grades; but in the matter of the morals which they left us we have gone

backward as many grades.  That evolution is strange, and to me

unaccountable and unnatural.  Necessarily we started equipped with their

perfect and blemishless morals; now we are wholly destitute; we have no

real, morals, but only artificial ones--morals created and preserved by

the forced suppression of natural and hellish instincts.  Yet we are dull

enough to be vain of them. Certainly we are a sufficiently comical

invention, we humans.

                         Sincerely Yours,

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.





     Mark Twain's own books were always being excommunicated by some

     librarian, and the matter never failed to invite the attention and

     amusement of the press, and the indignation of many correspondents.

     Usually the books were Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn, the morals of which

     were not regarded as wholly exemplary.  But in 1907 a small library,

     in a very small town, attained a day's national notoriety by putting

     the ban on Eve's Diary, not so much on account of its text as for

     the chaste and exquisite illustrations by Lester Ralph.  When the

     reporters came in a troop to learn about it, the author said: "I

     believe this time the trouble is mainly with the pictures.  I did

     not draw them.  I wish I had--they are so beautiful."



     Just at this time, Dr. William Lyon Phelps, of Yale, was giving a

     literary talk to the Teachers' Club, of Hartford, dwelling on the

     superlative value of Mark Twain's writings for readers old and

     young.  Mrs. F. G. Whitmore, an old Hartford friend, wrote Clemens

     of the things that Phelps had said, as consolation for Eve's latest

     banishment.  This gave him a chance to add something to what he had

     said to the reporters.





                      To Mrs. Whitmore, in Hartford:



                                                       Feb. 7, 1907.

DEAR MRS. WHITMORE,--But the truth is, that when a Library expels a book

of mine and leaves an unexpurgated Bible lying around where unprotected

youth and age can get hold of it, the deep unconscious irony of it

delights me and doesn't anger me.  But even if it angered me such words

as those of Professor Phelps would take the sting all out.  Nobody

attaches weight to the freaks of the Charlton Library, but when a man

like Phelps speaks, the world gives attention.  Some day I hope to meet

him and thank him for his courage for saying those things out in public.

Custom is, to think a handsome thing in private but tame it down in the

utterance.



I hope you are all well and happy; and thereto I add my love.

                              Sincerely yours,

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.





     In May, 1907, Mark Twain was invited to England to receive from

     Oxford the degree of Literary Doctor.  It was an honor that came to

     him as a sort of laurel crown at the end of a great career, and

     gratified him exceedingly.  To Moberly Bell, of the London Times,

     he expressed his appreciation.  Bell had been over in April and

     Clemens believed him concerned in the matter.





                       To Moberly Bell, in London:



                                        21 FIFTH AVENUE, May 3, '07

DEAR MR. BELL,--Your hand is in it! and you have my best thanks.

Although I wouldn't cross an ocean again for the price of the ship that

carried me, I am glad to do it for an Oxford degree.  I shall plan to

sail for England a shade before the middle of June, so that I can have a

few days in London before the 26th.

                                   Sincerely,

                                        S. L. CLEMENS.





     He had taken a house at Tuxedo for the summer, desiring to be near

     New York City, and in the next letter he writes Mr. Rogers

     concerning his London plans.  We discover, also, in this letter that

     he has begun work on the Redding home and the cost is to come

     entirely out of the autobiographical chapters then running in the

     North American Review.  It may be of passing interest to note here

     that he had the usual house-builder's fortune.  He received thirty

     thousand dollars for the chapters; the house cost him nearly double

     that amount.





                      To H. H. Rogers, in New York:



                                                            TUXEDO PARK,

                                                            May 29, '07.

DEAR ADMIRAL,--Why hang it, I am not going to see you and Mrs. Rogers at

all in England!  It is a great disappointment.  I leave there a month

from now--June 29.  No, I shall see you; for by your itinerary you are

most likely to come to London June 21st or along there.  So that is very

good and satisfactory.  I have declined all engagements but two--Whitelaw

Reid (dinner) June 21, and the Pilgrims (lunch), June 25.  The Oxford

ceremony is June 26.  I have paid my return passage in the

Minne-something, but it is just possible that I may want to stay in

England a week or two longer--I can't tell, yet.  I do very much want

to meet up with the boys for the last time.



I have signed the contract for the building of the house on my

Connecticut farm and specified the cost limit, and work has been begun.

The cost has to all come out of a year's instalments of Autobiography in

the N. A. Review.



Clara, is winning her way to success and distinction with sure and steady

strides.  By all accounts she is singing like a bird, and is not afraid

on the concert stage any more.



Tuxedo is a charming place; I think it hasn't its equal anywhere.



Very best wishes to you both.

                                   S. L. C.





     The story of Mark Twain's extraordinary reception and triumph in

     England has been told.--[Mark Twain; A Biography, chaps. cclvi-

     cclix]--It was, in fact, the crowning glory of his career.  Perhaps

     one of the most satisfactory incidents of his sojourn was a dinner

     given to him by the staff of Punch, in the historic offices at 10

     Bouverie Street where no other foreign visitor had been thus

     honored--a notable distinction.  When the dinner ended, little joy

     Agnew, daughter of the chief editor, entered and presented to the

     chief guest the original drawing of a cartoon by Bernard Partridge,

     which had appeared on the front page of Punch.  In this picture the

     presiding genius of the paper is offering to Mark Twain health, long

     life, and happiness from "The Punch Bowl."



     A short time after his return to America he received a pretty

     childish letter from little Miss Agnew acknowledging a photograph he

     had sent her, and giving a list of her pets and occupations.  Such a

     letter always delighted Mark Twain, and his pleasure in this one is

     reflected in his reply.





                      To Miss Joy Agnew, in London:



                                                  TUXEDO PARK, NEW YORK.

Unto you greetings and salutation and worship, you dear, sweet little

rightly-named Joy!  I can see you now almost as vividly as I saw you that

night when you sat flashing and beaming upon those sombre swallow-tails.



     "Fair as a star when only one

     Is shining in the sky."



Oh, you were indeed the only one--there wasn't even the remotest chance

of competition with you, dear!  Ah, you are a decoration, you little

witch!



The idea of your house going to the wanton expense of a flower garden!

--aren't you enough?  And what do you want to go and discourage the other

flowers for?  Is that the right spirit? is it considerate? is it kind?

How do you suppose they feel when you come around--looking the way you

look?  And you so pink and sweet and dainty and lovely and supernatural?

Why, it makes them feel embarrassed and artificial, of course; and in my

opinion it is just as pathetic as it can be.  Now then you want to

reform--dear--and do right.



Well certainly you are well off, Joy:



3 bantams;

3 goldfish;

3 doves;

6 canaries;

2 dogs;

1 cat;



All you need, now, to be permanently beyond the reach of want, is one

more dog--just one more good, gentle, high principled, affectionate,

loyal dog who wouldn't want any nobler service than the golden privilege

of lying at your door, nights, and biting everything that came along--and

I am that very one, and ready to come at the dropping of a hat.



Do you think you could convey my love and thanks to your "daddy" and Owen

Seaman and those other oppressed and down-trodden subjects of yours, you

darling small tyrant?



On my knees!  These--with the kiss of fealty from your other subject--



                                                  MARK TWAIN





     Elinor Glyn, author of Three Weeks and other erotic tales, was in

     America that winter and asked permission to call on Mark Twain.  An

     appointment was made and Clemens discussed with her, for an hour or

     more, those crucial phases of life which have made living a complex

     problem since the days of Eve in Eden.  Mrs. Glyn had never before

     heard anything like Mark Twain's wonderful talk, and she was anxious

     to print their interview.  She wrote what she could remember of it

     and sent it to him for approval.  If his conversation had been

     frank, his refusal was hardly less so.





                    To Mrs. Elinor Glyn, in New York:



                                                       Jan. 22, '08.

DEAR MRS. GLYN, It reads pretty poorly--I get the sense of it, but it is

a poor literary job; however, it would have to be that because nobody can

be reported even approximately, except by a stenographer.

Approximations, synopsized speeches, translated poems, artificial flowers

and chromos all have a sort of value, but it is small.  If you had put

upon paper what I really said it would have wrecked your type-machine.

I said some fetid, over-vigorous things, but that was because it was a

confidential conversation.  I said nothing for print.  My own report of

the same conversation reads like Satan roasting a Sunday school.  It, and

certain other readable chapters of my autobiography will not be published

until all the Clemens family are dead--dead and correspondingly

indifferent.  They were written to entertain me, not the rest of the

world.  I am not here to do good--at least not to do it intentionally.

You must pardon me for dictating this letter; I am sick a-bed and not

feeling as well as I might.

                              Sincerely Yours,

                                             S. L. CLEMENS.





     Among the cultured men of England Mark Twain had no greater admirer,

     or warmer friend, than Andrew Lang.  They were at one on most

     literary subjects, and especially so in their admiration of the life

     and character of Joan of Arc.  Both had written of her, and both

     held her to be something almost more than mortal.  When, therefore,

     Anatole France published his exhaustive biography of the maid of

     Domremy, a book in which he followed, with exaggerated minuteness

     and innumerable footnotes, every step of Joan's physical career at

