down in us, and the more happier and contented and satisfied we got to

feeling, and the more we got to liking the desert, and then loving it. So

we had cramped the speed down, as I was saying, and was having a most

noble good lazy time, sometimes watching through the glasses, sometimes

stretched out on the lockers reading, sometimes taking a nap.



It didn't seem like we was the same lot that was in such a state to find

land and git ashore, but it was. But we had got over that--clean over it.

We was used to the balloon now and not afraid any more, and didn't want

to be anywheres else. Why, it seemed just like home; it 'most seemed as

if I had been born and raised in it, and Jim and Tom said the same. And

always I had had hateful people around me, a-nagging at me, and pestering

of me, and scolding, and finding fault, and fussing and bothering, and

sticking to me, and keeping after me, and making me do this, and making

me do that and t'other, and always selecting out the things I didn't want

to do, and then giving me Sam Hill because I shirked and done something

else, and just aggravating the life out of a body all the time; but up

here in the sky it was so still and sunshiny and lovely, and plenty to

eat, and plenty of sleep, and strange things to see, and no nagging and

no pestering, and no good people, and just holiday all the time. Land, I

warn't in no hurry to git out and buck at civilization again. Now, one of

the worst things about civilization is, that anybody that gits a letter

with trouble in it comes and tells you all about it and makes you feel

bad, and the newspapers fetches you the troubles of everybody all over

the world, and keeps you downhearted and dismal 'most all the time, and

it's such a heavy load for a person. I hate them newspapers; and I hate

letters; and if I had my way I wouldn't allow nobody to load his troubles

on to other folks he ain't acquainted with, on t'other side of the world,

that way. Well, up in a balloon there ain't any of that, and it's the

darlingest place there is.



We had supper, and that night was one of the prettiest nights I ever see.

The moon made it just like daylight, only a heap softer; and once we see

a lion standing all alone by himself, just all alone on the earth, it

seemed like, and his shadder laid on the sand by him like a puddle of

ink. That's the kind of moonlight to have.



Mainly we laid on our backs and talked; we didn't want to go to sleep.

Tom said we was right in the midst of the Arabian Nights now. He said it

was right along here that one of the cutest things in that book happened;

so we looked down and watched while he told about it, because there ain't

anything that is so interesting to look at as a place that a book has

talked about. It was a tale about a camel-driver that had lost his camel,

and he come along in the desert and met a man, and says:



"Have you run across a stray camel to-day?"



And the man says:



"Was he blind in his left eye?"



"Yes."



"Had he lost an upper front tooth?"



"Yes."



"Was his off hind leg lame?"



"Yes."



"Was he loaded with millet-seed on one side and honey on the other?"



"Yes, but you needn't go into no more details--that's the one, and I'm

in a hurry. Where did you see him?"



"I hain't seen him at all," the man says.



"Hain't seen him at all? How can you describe him so close, then?"



"Because when a person knows how to use his eyes, everything has got a

meaning to it; but most people's eyes ain't any good to them. I knowed a

camel had been along, because I seen his track. I knowed he was lame in

his off hind leg because he had favored that foot and trod light on it,

and his track showed it. I knowed he was blind on his left side because

he only nibbled the grass on the right side of the trail. I knowed he had

lost an upper front tooth because where he bit into the sod his

teeth-print showed it. The millet-seed sifted out on one side--the ants

told me that; the honey leaked out on the other--the flies told me that.

I know all about your camel, but I hain't seen him."



Jim says:



"Go on, Mars Tom, hit's a mighty good tale, and powerful interestin'."



"That's all," Tom says.



"ALL?" says Jim, astonished. "What 'come o' de camel?"



"I don't know."



"Mars Tom, don't de tale say?"



"No."



Jim puzzled a minute, then he says:



"Well! Ef dat ain't de beatenes' tale ever I struck. Jist gits to de

place whah de intrust is gittin' red-hot, en down she breaks. Why, Mars

Tom, dey ain't no SENSE in a tale dat acts like dat. Hain't you got no

IDEA whether de man got de camel back er not?"



"No, I haven't."



I see myself there warn't no sense in the tale, to chop square off that

way before it come to anything, but I warn't going to say so, because I

could see Tom was souring up pretty fast over the way it flatted out and

the way Jim had popped on to the weak place in it, and I don't think it's

fair for everybody to pile on to a feller when he's down. But Tom he

whirls on me and says:



"What do YOU think of the tale?"



Of course, then, I had to come out and make a clean breast and say it did

seem to me, too, same as it did to Jim, that as long as the tale stopped

square in the middle and never got to no place, it really warn't worth

the trouble of telling.



Tom's chin dropped on his breast, and 'stead of being mad, as I reckoned

he'd be, to hear me scoff at his tale that way, he seemed to be only sad;

and he says:



"Some people can see, and some can't--just as that man said. Let alone a

camel, if a cyclone had gone by, YOU duffers wouldn't 'a' noticed the

track."



I don't know what he meant by that, and he didn't say; it was just one of

his irrulevances, I reckon--he was full of them, sometimes, when he was

in a close place and couldn't see no other way out--but I didn't mind.

We'd spotted the soft place in that tale sharp enough, he couldn't git

away from that little fact. It graveled him like the nation, too, I

reckon, much as he tried not to let on.







 CHAPTER VIII. THE DISAPPEARING LAKE



WE had an early breakfast in the morning, and set looking down on the

desert, and the weather was ever so bammy and lovely, although we warn't

high up. You have to come down lower and lower after sundown in the

desert, because it cools off so fast; and so, by the time it is getting

toward dawn, you are skimming along only a little ways above the sand.



We was watching the shadder of the balloon slide along the ground, and

now and then gazing off across the desert to see if anything was

stirring, and then down on the shadder again, when all of a sudden almost

right under us we see a lot of men and camels laying scattered about,

perfectly quiet, like they was asleep.



We shut off the power, and backed up and stood over them, and then we see

that they was all dead. It give us the cold shivers. And it made us hush

down, too, and talk low, like people at a funeral. We dropped down slow

and stopped, and me and Tom clumb down and went among them. There was

men, and women, and children. They was dried by the sun and dark and

shriveled and leathery, like the pictures of mummies you see in books.

And yet they looked just as human, you wouldn't 'a' believed it; just

like they was asleep.



Some of the people and animals was partly covered with sand, but most of

them not, for the sand was thin there, and the bed was gravel and hard.

Most of the clothes had rotted away; and when you took hold of a rag, it

tore with a touch, like spiderweb. Tom reckoned they had been laying

there for years.



Some of the men had rusty guns by them, some had swords on and had shawl

belts with long, silver-mounted pistols stuck in them. All the camels had

their loads on yet, but the packs had busted or rotted and spilt the

freight out on the ground. We didn't reckon the swords was any good to

the dead people any more, so we took one apiece, and some pistols. We

took a small box, too, because it was so handsome and inlaid so fine; and

then we wanted to bury the people; but there warn't no way to do it that

we could think of, and nothing to do it with but sand, and that would

blow away again, of course.



Then we mounted high and sailed away, and pretty soon that black spot on

the sand was out of sight, and we wouldn't ever see them poor people

again in this world. We wondered, and reasoned, and tried to guess how

they come to be there, and how it all happened to them, but we couldn't

make it out. First we thought maybe they got lost, and wandered around

and about till their food and water give out and they starved to death;

but Tom said no wild animals nor vultures hadn't meddled with them, and

so that guess wouldn't do. So at last we give it up, and judged we

wouldn't think about it no more, because it made us low-spirited.



Then we opened the box, and it had gems and jewels in it, quite a pile,

and some little veils of the kind the dead women had on, with fringes

made out of curious gold money that we warn't acquainted with. We

wondered if we better go and try to find them again and give it back; but

Tom thought it over and said no, it was a country that was full of

robbers, and they would come and steal it; and then the sin would be on

us for putting the temptation in their way. So we went on; but I wished

we had took all they had, so there wouldn't 'a' been no temptation at all

left.



We had had two hours of that blazing weather down there, and was dreadful

thirsty when we got aboard again. We went straight for the water, but it

was spoiled and bitter, besides being pretty near hot enough to scald

your mouth. We couldn't drink it. It was Mississippi river water, the

best in the world, and we stirred up the mud in it to see if that would

help, but no, the mud wasn't any better than the water. Well, we hadn't

been so very, very thirsty before, while we was interested in the lost

people, but we was now, and as soon as we found we couldn't have a drink,

we was more than thirty-five times as thirsty as we was a quarter of a

minute before. Why, in a little while we wanted to hold our mouths open

and pant like a dog.



Tom said to keep a sharp lookout, all around, everywheres, because we'd

got to find an oasis or there warn't no telling what would happen. So we

done it. We kept the glasses gliding around all the time, till our arms

got so tired we couldn't hold them any more. Two hours--three hours--just

gazing and gazing, and nothing but sand, sand, SAND, and you could see

the quivering heat-shimmer playing over it. Dear, dear, a body don't know

what real misery is till he is thirsty all the way through and is certain

he ain't ever going to come to any water any more. At last I couldn't

stand it to look around on them baking plains; I laid down on the locker,

and give it up.



But by and by Tom raised a whoop, and there she was! A lake, wide and

shiny, with pa'm-trees leaning over it asleep, and their shadders in the

water just as soft and delicate as ever you see. I never see anything

look so good. It was a long ways off, but that warn't anything to us; we

just slapped on a hundred-mile gait, and calculated to be there in seven

minutes; but she stayed the same old distance away, all the time; we

couldn't seem to gain on her; yes, sir, just as far, and shiny, and like

a dream; but we couldn't get no nearer; and at last, all of a sudden, she

was gone!



Tom's eyes took a spread, and he says:



"Boys, it was a MYridge!" Said it like he was glad. I didn't see nothing

to be glad about. I says:



"Maybe. I don't care nothing about its name, the thing I want to know is,

what's become of it?"



Jim was trembling all over, and so scared he couldn't speak, but he

wanted to ask that question himself if he could 'a' done it. Tom says:



"What's BECOME of it? Why, you see yourself it's gone."



"Yes, I know; but where's it gone TO?"



He looked me over and says:



"Well, now, Huck Finn, where WOULD it go to! Don't you know what a

myridge is?"



"No, I don't. What is it?"



"It ain't anything but imagination. There ain't anything TO it."



It warmed me up a little to hear him talk like that, and I says:



"What's the use you talking that kind of stuff, Tom Sawyer? Didn't I see

the lake?"



"Yes--you think you did."



"I don't think nothing about it, I DID see it."



"I tell you you DIDN'T see it either--because it warn't there to see."



It astonished Jim to hear him talk so, and he broke in and says, kind of

pleading and distressed:



"Mars Tom, PLEASE don't say sich things in sich an awful time as dis. You

ain't only reskin' yo' own self, but you's reskin' us--same way like Anna

Nias en Siffra. De lake WUZ dah--I seen it jis' as plain as I sees you en

Huck dis minute."



I says:



"Why, he seen it himself! He was the very one that seen it first. NOW,

then!"



"Yes, Mars Tom, hit's so--you can't deny it. We all seen it, en dat PROVE

it was dah."



"Proves it! How does it prove it?"



"Same way it does in de courts en everywheres, Mars Tom. One pusson might

be drunk, or dreamy or suthin', en he could be mistaken; en two might,

maybe; but I tell you, sah, when three sees a thing, drunk er sober, it's

SO. Dey ain't no gittin' aroun' dat, en you knows it, Mars Tom."



"I don't know nothing of the kind. There used to be forty thousand

million people that seen the sun move from one side of the sky to the

other every day. Did that prove that the sun DONE it?"



"Course it did. En besides, dey warn't no 'casion to prove it. A body

'at's got any sense ain't gwine to doubt it. Dah she is now--a sailin'

thoo de sky, like she allays done."



Tom turned on me, then, and says:



"What do YOU say--is the sun standing still?"



"Tom Sawyer, what's the use to ask such a jackass question? Anybody that

ain't blind can see it don't stand still."



"Well," he says, "I'm lost in the sky with no company but a passel of

low-down animals that don't know no more than the head boss of a

university did three or four hundred years ago."



It warn't fair play, and I let him know it. I says:



"Throwin' mud ain't arguin', Tom Sawyer."



"Oh, my goodness, oh, my goodness gracious, dah's de lake agi'n!" yelled

Jim, just then. "NOW, Mars Tom, what you gwine to say?"



Yes, sir, there was the lake again, away yonder across the desert,

perfectly plain, trees and all, just the same as it was before. I says:



"I reckon you're satisfied now, Tom Sawyer."



But he says, perfectly ca'm:



"Yes, satisfied there ain't no lake there."



Jim says:



"DON'T talk so, Mars Tom--it sk'yers me to hear you. It's so hot, en

you's so thirsty, dat you ain't in yo' right mine, Mars Tom. Oh, but

don't she look good! 'clah I doan' know how I's gwine to wait tell we

gits dah, I's SO thirsty."



"Well, you'll have to wait; and it won't do you no good, either, because

there ain't no lake there, I tell you."



I says:



"Jim, don't you take your eye off of it, and I won't, either."



"'Deed I won't; en bless you, honey, I couldn't ef I wanted to."



We went a-tearing along toward it, piling the miles behind us like

nothing, but never gaining an inch on it--and all of a sudden it was

gone again! Jim staggered, and 'most fell down. When he got his breath he

says, gasping like a fish:



"Mars Tom, hit's a GHOS', dat's what it is, en I hopes to goodness we

ain't gwine to see it no mo'. Dey's BEEN a lake, en suthin's happened, en

de lake's dead, en we's seen its ghos'; we's seen it twiste, en dat's

proof. De desert's ha'nted, it's ha'nted, sho; oh, Mars Tom, le''s git

outen it; I'd ruther die den have de night ketch us in it ag'in en de

ghos' er dat lake come a-mournin' aroun' us en we asleep en doan' know de

danger we's in."



"Ghost, you gander! It ain't anything but air and heat and thirstiness

pasted together by a person's imagination. If I--gimme the glass!"



He grabbed it and begun to gaze off to the right.



"It's a flock of birds," he says. "It's getting toward sundown, and

they're making a bee-line across our track for somewheres. They mean

business--maybe they're going for food or water, or both. Let her go to

starboard!--Port your hellum! Hard down! There--ease up--steady, as you

go."



We shut down some of the power, so as not to outspeed them, and took out

after them. We went skimming along a quarter of a mile behind them, and

when we had followed them an hour and a half and was getting pretty

discouraged, and was thirsty clean to unendurableness, Tom says:



"Take the glass, one of you, and see what that is, away ahead of the

birds."



Jim got the first glimpse, and slumped down on the locker sick. He was

most crying, and says:



"She's dah ag'in, Mars Tom, she's dah ag'in, en I knows I's gwine to die,

'case when a body sees a ghos' de third time, dat's what it means. I

wisht I'd never come in dis balloon, dat I does."



He wouldn't look no more, and what he said made me afraid, too, because I

knowed it was true, for that has always been the way with ghosts; so then

I wouldn't look any more, either. Both of us begged Tom to turn off and

go some other way, but he wouldn't, and said we was ignorant

superstitious blatherskites. Yes, and he'll git come up with, one of

these days, I says to myself, insulting ghosts that way. They'll stand it

for a while, maybe, but they won't stand it always, for anybody that

knows about ghosts knows how easy they are hurt, and how revengeful they

are.



So we was all quiet and still, Jim and me being scared, and Tom busy. By

and by Tom fetched the balloon to a standstill, and says:



"NOW get up and look, you sapheads."



We done it, and there was the sure-enough water right under us!--clear,

and blue, and cool, and deep, and wavy with the breeze, the loveliest

sight that ever was. And all about it was grassy banks, and flowers, and

shady groves of big trees, looped together with vines, and all looking so

peaceful and comfortable--enough to make a body cry, it was so

beautiful.



Jim DID cry, and rip and dance and carry on, he was so thankful and out

of his mind for joy. It was my watch, so I had to stay by the works, but

Tom and Jim clumb down and drunk a barrel apiece, and fetched me up a

lot, and I've tasted a many a good thing in my life, but nothing that

ever begun with that water.



Then we went down and had a swim, and then Tom came up and spelled me,

and me and Jim had a swim, and then Jim spelled Tom, and me and Tom had a

foot-race and a boxing-mill, and I don't reckon I ever had such a good

time in my life. It warn't so very hot, because it was close on to

evening, and we hadn't any clothes on, anyway. Clothes is well enough in

school, and in towns, and at balls, too, but there ain't no sense in them

when there ain't no civilization nor other kinds of bothers and fussiness

around.



"Lions a-comin'!--lions! Quick, Mars Tom! Jump for yo' life, Huck!"



Oh, and didn't we! We never stopped for clothes, but waltzed up the

ladder just so. Jim lost his head straight off--he always done it

whenever he got excited and scared; and so now, 'stead of just easing the

ladder up from the ground a little, so the animals couldn't reach it, he

turned on a raft of power, and we went whizzing up and was dangling in

the sky before he got his wits together and seen what a foolish thing he

was doing. Then he stopped her, but he had clean forgot what to do next;

so there we was, so high that the lions looked like pups, and we was

drifting off on the wind.



But Tom he shinned up and went for the works and begun to slant her down,

and back toward the lake, where the animals was gathering like a

camp-meeting, and I judged he had lost HIS head, too; for he knowed I was

too scared to climb, and did he want to dump me among the tigers and

things?



But no, his head was level, he knowed what he was about. He swooped down

to within thirty or forty feet of the lake, and stopped right over the

center, and sung out:



"Leggo, and drop!"



I done it, and shot down, feet first, and seemed to go about a mile

toward the bottom; and when I come up, he says:



"Now lay on your back and float till you're rested and got your pluck

back, then I'll dip the ladder in the water and you can climb aboard."



I done it. Now that was ever so smart in Tom, because if he had started

off somewheres else to drop down on the sand, the menagerie would 'a'

come along, too, and might 'a' kept us hunting a safe place till I got

tuckered out and fell.



And all this time the lions and tigers was sorting out the clothes, and

trying to divide them up so there would be some for all, but there was a

misunderstanding about it somewheres, on account of some of them trying

to hog more than their share; so there was another insurrection, and you

never see anything like it in the world. There must 'a' been fifty of

them, all mixed up together, snorting and roaring and snapping and biting

and tearing, legs and tails in the air, and you couldn't tell which was

which, and the sand and fur a-flying. And when they got done, some was

dead and some was limping off crippled, and the rest was setting around

on the battlefield, some of them licking their sore places and the others

looking up at us and seemed to be kind of inviting us to come down and

have some fun, but which we didn't want any.



As for the clothes, they warn't any, any more. Every last rag of them was

inside of the animals; and not agreeing with them very well, I don't

reckon, for there was considerable many brass buttons on them, and there

was knives in the pockets, too, and smoking tobacco, and nails and chalk

and marbles and fishhooks and things. But I wasn't caring. All that was

bothering me was, that all we had now was the professor's clothes, a big

enough assortment, but not suitable to go into company with, if we came

across any, because the britches was as long as tunnels, and the coats

and things according. Still, there was everything a tailor needed, and

Jim was a kind of jack legged tailor, and he allowed he could soon trim a

suit or two down for us that would answer.







 CHAPTER IX. TOM DISCOURSES ON THE DESERT



STILL, we thought we would drop down there a minute, but on another

errand. Most of the professor's cargo of food was put up in cans, in the

new way that somebody had just invented; the rest was fresh. When you

fetch Missouri beefsteak to the Great Sahara, you want to be particular

and stay up in the coolish weather. So we reckoned we would drop down

into the lion market and see how we could make out there.



We hauled in the ladder and dropped down till we was just above the reach

of the animals, then we let down a rope with a slip-knot in it and hauled

up a dead lion, a small tender one, then yanked up a cub tiger. We had to

keep the congregation off with the revolver, or they would 'a' took a

hand in the proceedings and helped.



We carved off a supply from both, and saved the skins, and hove the rest

overboard. Then we baited some of the professor's hooks with the fresh

meat and went a-fishing. We stood over the lake just a convenient

distance above the water, and catched a lot of the nicest fish you ever

see. It was a most amazing good supper we had; lion steak, tiger steak,

fried fish, and hot corn-pone. I don't want nothing better than that.



We had some fruit to finish off with. We got it out of the top of a

monstrous tall tree. It was a very slim tree that hadn't a branch on it

from the bottom plumb to the top, and there it bursted out like a

feather-duster. It was a pa'm-tree, of course; anybody knows a pa'm-tree

the minute he see it, by the pictures. We went for cocoanuts in this one,

but there warn't none. There was only big loose bunches of things like

oversized grapes, and Tom allowed they was dates, because he said they

answered the description in the Arabian Nights and the other books. Of

course they mightn't be, and they might be poison; so we had to wait a

spell, and watch and see if the birds et them. They done it; so we done

it, too, and they was most amazing good.



By this time monstrous big birds begun to come and settle on the dead

animals. They was plucky creturs; they would tackle one end of a lion

that was being gnawed at the other end by another lion. If the lion drove

the bird away, it didn't do no good; he was back again the minute the

lion was busy.



The big birds come out of every part of the sky--you could make them out

with the glass while they was still so far away you couldn't see them

with your naked eye. Tom said the birds didn't find out the meat was

there by the smell; they had to find it out by seeing it. Oh, but ain't

that an eye for you! Tom said at the distance of five mile a patch of

dead lions couldn't look any bigger than a person's finger-nail, and he

couldn't imagine how the birds could notice such a little thing so far

off.



It was strange and unnatural to see lion eat lion, and we thought maybe

they warn't kin. But Jim said that didn't make no difference. He said a

hog was fond of her own children, and so was a spider, and he reckoned

maybe a lion was pretty near as unprincipled though maybe not quite. He

thought likely a lion wouldn't eat his own father, if he knowed which was

him, but reckoned he would eat his brother-in-law if he was uncommon

hungry, and eat his mother-in-law any time. But RECKONING don't settle

nothing. You can reckon till the cows come home, but that don't fetch you

to no decision. So we give it up and let it drop.



Generly it was very still in the Desert nights, but this time there was

music. A lot of other animals come to dinner; sneaking yelpers that Tom

allowed was jackals, and roached-backed ones that he said was hyenas; and

all the whole biling of them kept up a racket all the time. They made a

picture in the moonlight that was more different than any picture I ever

see. We had a line out and made fast to the top of a tree, and didn't

stand no watch, but all turned in and slept; but I was up two or three

times to look down at the animals and hear the music. It was like having

a front seat at a menagerie for nothing, which I hadn't ever had before,

and so it seemed foolish to sleep and not make the most of it; I mightn't

ever have such a chance again.



We went a-fishing again in the early dawn, and then lazied around all day

in the deep shade on an island, taking turn about to watch and see that

none of the animals come a-snooping around there after erronorts for

dinner. We was going to leave the next day, but couldn't, it was too

lovely.



The day after, when we rose up toward the sky and sailed off eastward, we

looked back and watched that place till it warn't nothing but just a

speck in the Desert, and I tell you it was like saying good-bye to a

friend that you ain't ever going to see any more.



Jim was thinking to himself, and at last he says:



"Mars Tom, we's mos' to de end er de Desert now, I speck."



"Why?"



"Well, hit stan' to reason we is. You knows how long we's been a-skimmin'

over it. Mus' be mos' out o' san'. Hit's a wonder to me dat it's hilt out

as long as it has."



"Shucks, there's plenty sand, you needn't worry."



"Oh, I ain't a-worryin', Mars Tom, only wonderin', dat's all. De Lord's

got plenty san', I ain't doubtin' dat; but nemmine, He ain't gwyne to

WAS'E it jist on dat account; en I allows dat dis Desert's plenty big

enough now, jist de way she is, en you can't spread her out no mo' 'dout

was'in' san'."



"Oh, go 'long! we ain't much more than fairly STARTED across this Desert

yet. The United States is a pretty big country, ain't it? Ain't it,

Huck?"



"Yes," I says, "there ain't no bigger one, I don't reckon."



"Well," he says, "this Desert is about the shape of the United States,

and if you was to lay it down on top of the United States, it would cover

the land of the free out of sight like a blanket. There'd be a little

corner sticking out, up at Maine and away up northwest, and Florida

sticking out like a turtle's tail, and that's all. We've took California

away from the Mexicans two or three years ago, so that part of the

Pacific coast is ours now, and if you laid the Great Sahara down with her

edge on the Pacific, she would cover the United States and stick out past

New York six hundred miles into the Atlantic ocean."



I say:



"Good land! have you got the documents for that, Tom Sawyer?"



"Yes, and they're right here, and I've been studying them. You can look

for yourself. From New York to the Pacific is 2,600 miles. From one end

of the Great Desert to the other is 3,200. The United States contains

3,600,000 square miles, the Desert contains 4,162,000. With the Desert's

bulk you could cover up every last inch of the United States, and in

under where the edges projected out, you could tuck England, Scotland,

Ireland, France, Denmark, and all Germany. Yes, sir, you could hide the

home of the brave and all of them countries clean out of sight under the

Great Sahara, and you would still have 2,000 square miles of sand left."



"Well," I says, "it clean beats me. Why, Tom, it shows that the Lord took

as much pains makin' this Desert as makin' the United States and all them

other countries."



Jim says: "Huck, dat don' stan' to reason. I reckon dis Desert wa'n't

made at all. Now you take en look at it like dis--you look at it, and see

ef I's right. What's a desert good for? 'Taint good for nuthin'. Dey

ain't no way to make it pay. Hain't dat so, Huck?"



"Yes, I reckon."



"Hain't it so, Mars Tom?"



"I guess so. Go on."



"Ef a thing ain't no good, it's made in vain, ain't it?"



"Yes."



"NOW, den! Do de Lord make anything in vain? You answer me dat."



"Well--no, He don't."



"Den how come He make a desert?"



"Well, go on. How DID He come to make it?"



"Mars Tom, I b'lieve it uz jes like when you's buildin' a house; dey's

allays a lot o' truck en rubbish lef' over. What does you do wid it?

Doan' you take en k'yart it off en dump it into a ole vacant back lot?

'Course. Now, den, it's my opinion hit was jes like dat--dat de Great

Sahara warn't made at all, she jes HAPPEN'."



I said it was a real good argument, and I believed it was the best one

Jim ever made. Tom he said the same, but said the trouble about arguments

is, they ain't nothing but THEORIES, after all, and theories don't prove

nothing, they only give you a place to rest on, a spell, when you are

tuckered out butting around and around trying to find out something there

ain't no way TO find out. And he says:



"There's another trouble about theories: there's always a hole in them

somewheres, sure, if you look close enough. It's just so with this one of

Jim's. Look what billions and billions of stars there is. How does it

come that there was just exactly enough star-stuff, and none left over?

How does it come there ain't no sand-pile up there?"



But Jim was fixed for him and says:



"What's de Milky Way?--dat's what I want to know. What's de Milky Way?

Answer me dat!"



In my opinion it was just a sockdologer. It's only an opinion, it's only

MY opinion and others may think different; but I said it then and I stand

to it now--it was a sockdologer. And moreover, besides, it landed Tom

Sawyer. He couldn't say a word. He had that stunned look of a person

that's been shot in the back with a kag of nails. All he said was, as for

people like me and Jim, he'd just as soon have intellectual intercourse

with a catfish. But anybody can say that--and I notice they always do,

when somebody has fetched them a lifter. Tom Sawyer was tired of that end

of the subject.



  So we got back to talking about the size of the Desert again, and the

more we compared it with this and that and t'other thing, the more nobler

and bigger and grander it got to look right along. And so, hunting among

the figgers, Tom found, by and by, that it was just the same size as the

Empire of China. Then he showed us the spread the Empire of China made on

the map, and the room she took up in the world. Well, it was wonderful to

think of, and I says:



"Why, I've heard talk about this Desert plenty of times, but I never

knowed before how important she was."



Then Tom says:



"Important! Sahara important! That's just the way with some people. If a

thing's big, it's important. That's all the sense they've got. All they

can see is SIZE. Why, look at England. It's the most important country in

the world; and yet you could put it in China's vest-pocket; and not only

that, but you'd have the dickens's own time to find it again the next

time you wanted it. And look at Russia. It spreads all around and

everywhere, and yet ain't no more important in this world than Rhode

Island is, and hasn't got half as much in it that's worth saving."



Away off now we see a little hill, a-standing up just on the edge of the

world. Tom broke off his talk, and reached for a glass very much excited,

and took a look, and says:



"That's it--it's the one I've been looking for, sure. If I'm right, it's

the one the dervish took the man into and showed him all the treasures."



So we begun to gaze, and he begun to tell about it out of the Arabian

Nights.







 CHAPTER X. THE TREASURE-HILL



TOM said it happened like this.



A dervish was stumping it along through the Desert, on foot, one blazing

hot day, and he had come a thousand miles and was pretty poor, and

hungry, and ornery and tired, and along about where we are now he run

across a camel-driver with a hundred camels, and asked him for some a'ms.

But the cameldriver he asked to be excused. The dervish said:



"Don't you own these camels?"



"Yes, they're mine."



"Are you in debt?"



"Who--me? No."



"Well, a man that owns a hundred camels and ain't in debt is rich--and

not only rich, but very rich. Ain't it so?"



The camel-driver owned up that it was so. Then the dervish says:



"God has made you rich, and He has made me poor. He has His reasons, and

they are wise, blessed be His name. But He has willed that His rich shall

help His poor, and you have turned away from me, your brother, in my

need, and He will remember this, and you will lose by it."



That made the camel-driver feel shaky, but all the same he was born

hoggish after money and didn't like to let go a cent; so he begun to

whine and explain, and said times was hard, and although he had took a

full freight down to Balsora and got a fat rate for it, he couldn't git

no return freight, and so he warn't making no great things out of his

trip. So the dervish starts along again, and says:



"All right, if you want to take the risk; but I reckon you've made a

mistake this time, and missed a chance."



Of course the camel-driver wanted to know what kind of a chance he had

missed, because maybe there was money in it; so he run after the dervish,

and begged him so hard and earnest to take pity on him that at last the

dervish gave in, and says:



"Do you see that hill yonder? Well, in that hill is all the treasures of

the earth, and I was looking around for a man with a particular good kind

heart and a noble, generous disposition, because if I could find just

that man, I've got a kind of a salve I could put on his eyes and he could

see the treasures and get them out."



So then the camel-driver was in a sweat; and he cried, and begged, and

took on, and went down on his knees, and said he was just that kind of a

man, and said he could fetch a thousand people that would say he wasn't

ever described so exact before.



"Well, then," says the dervish, "all right. If we load the hundred

camels, can I have half of them?"



The driver was so glad he couldn't hardly hold in, and says:



"Now you're shouting."



So they shook hands on the bargain, and the dervish got out his box and

rubbed the salve on the driver's right eye, and the hill opened and he

went in, and there, sure enough, was piles and piles of gold and jewels

sparkling like all the stars in heaven had fell down.



So him and the dervish laid into it, and they loaded every camel till he

couldn't carry no more; then they said good-bye, and each of them started

off with his fifty. But pretty soon the camel-driver come a-running and

overtook the dervish and says:



"You ain't in society, you know, and you don't really need all you've

got. Won't you be good, and let me have ten of your camels?"



"Well," the dervish says, "I don't know but what you say is reasonable

enough."



So he done it, and they separated and the dervish started off again with

his forty. But pretty soon here comes the camel-driver bawling after him

again, and whines and slobbers around and begs another ten off of him,

saying thirty camel loads of treasures was enough to see a dervish

through, because they live very simple, you know, and don't keep house,

but board around and give their note.



But that warn't the end yet. That ornery hound kept coming and coming

till he had begged back all the camels and had the whole hundred. Then he

was satisfied, and ever so grateful, and said he wouldn't ever forgit the

dervish as long as he lived, and nobody hadn't been so good to him

before, and liberal. So they shook hands good-bye, and separated and

started off again.



But do you know, it warn't ten minutes till the camel-driver was

unsatisfied again--he was the lowdownest reptyle in seven counties--and

he come a-running again. And this time the thing he wanted was to get the

dervish to rub some of the salve on his other eye.



"Why?" said the dervish.



"Oh, you know," says the driver.



"Know what?"



"Well, you can't fool me," says the driver. "You're trying to keep back

something from me, you know it mighty well. You know, I reckon, that if I

had the salve on the other eye I could see a lot more things that's

valuable. Come--please put it on."



The dervish says:



"I wasn't keeping anything back from you. I don't mind telling you what

would happen if I put it on. You'd never see again. You'd be stone-blind

the rest of your days."



But do you know that beat wouldn't believe him. No, he begged and begged,

and whined and cried, till at last the dervish opened his box and told

him to put it on, if he wanted to. So the man done it, and sure enough he

was as blind as a bat in a minute.



Then the dervish laughed at him and mocked at him and made fun of him;

and says:



"Good-bye--a man that's blind hain't got no use for jewelry."



And he cleared out with the hundred camels, and left that man to wander

around poor and miserable and friendless the rest of his days in the

Desert.



Jim said he'd bet it was a lesson to him.



"Yes," Tom says, "and like a considerable many lessons a body gets. They

ain't no account, because the thing don't ever happen the same way

again--and can't. The time Hen Scovil fell down the chimbly and crippled

his back for life, everybody said it would be a lesson to him. What kind

of a lesson? How was he going to use it? He couldn't climb chimblies no

more, and he hadn't no more backs to break."



"All de same, Mars Tom, dey IS sich a thing as learnin' by expe'ence. De

Good Book say de burnt chile shun de fire."



"Well, I ain't denying that a thing's a lesson if it's a thing that can

happen twice just the same way. There's lots of such things, and THEY

educate a person, that's what Uncle Abner always said; but there's forty

MILLION lots of the other kind--the kind that don't happen the same way

twice--and they ain't no real use, they ain't no more instructive than

the small-pox. When you've got it, it ain't no good to find out you ought

to been vaccinated, and it ain't no good to git vaccinated afterward,

because the small-pox don't come but once. But, on the other hand, Uncle

Abner said that the person that had took a bull by the tail once had

learnt sixty or seventy times as much as a person that hadn't, and said a

person that started in to carry a cat home by the tail was gitting

knowledge that was always going to be useful to him, and warn't ever

going to grow dim or doubtful. But I can tell you, Jim, Uncle Abner was

down on them people that's all the time trying to dig a lesson out of

everything that happens, no matter whether--"



But Jim was asleep. Tom looked kind of ashamed, because you know a person

always feels bad when he is talking uncommon fine and thinks the other

person is admiring, and that other person goes to sleep that way. Of

course he oughtn't to go to sleep, because it's shabby; but the finer a

person talks the certainer it is to make you sleep, and so when you come

to look at it it ain't nobody's fault in particular; both of them's to

blame.



Jim begun to snore--soft and blubbery at first, then a long rasp, then a

stronger one, then a half a dozen horrible ones like the last water

sucking down the plug-hole of a bath-tub, then the same with more power

to it, and some big coughs and snorts flung in, the way a cow does that

is choking to death; and when the person has got to that point he is at

his level best, and can wake up a man that is in the next block with a

dipperful of loddanum in him, but can't wake himself up although all that

awful noise of his'n ain't but three inches from his own ears. And that

is the curiosest thing in the world, seems to me. But you rake a match to

light the candle, and that little bit of a noise will fetch him. I wish I

knowed what was the reason of that, but there don't seem to be no way to

find out. Now there was Jim alarming the whole Desert, and yanking the

animals out, for miles and miles around, to see what in the nation was

going on up there; there warn't nobody nor nothing that was as close to

the noise as HE was, and yet he was the only cretur that wasn't disturbed

by it. We yelled at him and whooped at him, it never done no good; but

the first time there come a little wee noise that wasn't of a usual kind

it woke him up. No, sir, I've thought it all over, and so has Tom, and

there ain't no way to find out why a snorer can't hear himself snore.



Jim said he hadn't been asleep; he just shut his eyes so he could listen

better.



Tom said nobody warn't accusing him.



That made him look like he wished he hadn't said anything. And he wanted

to git away from the subject, I reckon, because he begun to abuse the

camel-driver, just the way a person does when he has got catched in

something and wants to take it out of somebody else. He let into the

camel-driver the hardest he knowed how, and I had to agree with him; and

he praised up the dervish the highest he could, and I had to agree with

him there, too. But Tom says:



"I ain't so sure. You call that dervish so dreadful liberal and good and

unselfish, but I don't quite see it. He didn't hunt up another poor

dervish, did he? No, he didn't. If he was so unselfish, why didn't he go

in there himself and take a pocketful of jewels and go along and be

satisfied? No, sir, the person he was hunting for was a man with a

hundred camels. He wanted to get away with all the treasure he could."



"Why, Mars Tom, he was willin' to divide, fair and square; he only struck

for fifty camels."



"Because he knowed how he was going to get all of them by and by."



"Mars Tom, he TOLE de man de truck would make him bline."



"Yes, because he knowed the man's character. It was just the kind of a

man he was hunting for--a man that never believes in anybody's word or

anybody's honorableness, because he ain't got none of his own. I reckon

there's lots of people like that dervish. They swindle, right and left,

but they always make the other person SEEM to swindle himself. They keep

inside of the letter of the law all the time, and there ain't no way to

git hold of them. THEY don't put the salve on--oh, no, that would be

sin; but they know how to fool YOU into putting it on, then it's you that

blinds yourself. I reckon the dervish and the camel-driver was just a

pair--a fine, smart, brainy rascal, and a dull, coarse, ignorant one, but

both of them rascals, just the same."



"Mars Tom, does you reckon dey's any o' dat kind o' salve in de worl'

now?"



"Yes, Uncle Abner says there is. He says they've got it in New York, and

they put it on country people's eyes and show them all the railroads in

the world, and they go in and git them, and then when they rub the salve

on the other eye the other man bids them goodbye and goes off with their

railroads. Here's the treasure-hill now. Lower away!"



We landed, but it warn't as interesting as I thought it was going to be,

because we couldn't find the place where they went in to git the

treasure. Still, it was plenty interesting enough, just to see the mere

hill itself where such a wonderful thing happened. Jim said he wou'dn't

'a' missed it for three dollars, and I felt the same way.



And to me and Jim, as wonderful a thing as any was the way Tom could come

into a strange big country like this and go straight and find a little

hump like that and tell it in a minute from a million other humps that

was almost just like it, and nothing to help him but only his own

learning and his own natural smartness. We talked and talked it over

together, but couldn't make out how he done it. He had the best head on

him I ever see; and all he lacked was age, to make a name for himself

equal to Captain Kidd or George Washington. I bet you it would 'a'

crowded either of THEM to find that hill, with all their gifts, but it

warn't nothing to Tom Sawyer; he went across Sahara and put his finger on

it as easy as you could pick a nigger out of a bunch of angels.



We found a pond of salt water close by and scraped up a raft of salt

around the edges, and loaded up the lion's skin and the tiger's so as

they would keep till Jim could tan them.







 CHAPTER XI. THE SAND-STORM



WE went a-fooling along for a day or two, and then just as the full moon

was touching the ground on the other side of the desert, we see a string

of little black figgers moving across its big silver face. You could see

them as plain as if they was painted on the moon with ink. It was another

caravan. We cooled down our speed and tagged along after it, just to have

company, though it warn't going our way. It was a rattler, that caravan,

and a most bully sight to look at next morning when the sun come

a-streaming across the desert and flung the long shadders of the camels

on the gold sand like a thousand grand-daddy-long-legses marching in

procession. We never went very near it, because we knowed better now than

to act like that and scare people's camels and break up their caravans.

It was the gayest outfit you ever see, for rich clothes and nobby style.

Some of the chiefs rode on dromedaries, the first we ever see, and very

tall, and they go plunging along like they was on stilts, and they rock

the man that is on them pretty violent and churn up his dinner

considerable, I bet you, but they make noble good time, and a camel ain't

nowheres with them for speed.



The caravan camped, during the middle part of the day, and then started

again about the middle of the afternoon. Before long the sun begun to

look very curious. First it kind of turned to brass, and then to copper,

and after that it begun to look like a blood-red ball, and the air got

hot and close, and pretty soon all the sky in the west darkened up and

looked thick and foggy, but fiery and dreadful--like it looks through a

piece of red glass, you know. We looked down and see a big confusion

going on in the caravan, and a rushing every which way like they was

scared; and then they all flopped down flat in the sand and laid there

perfectly still.



Pretty soon we see something coming that stood up like an amazing wide

wall, and reached from the Desert up into the sky and hid the sun, and it

was coming like the nation, too. Then a little faint breeze struck us,

and then it come harder, and grains of sand begun to sift against our

faces and sting like fire, and Tom sung out:



"It's a sand-storm--turn your backs to it!"



We done it; and in another minute it was blowing a gale, and the sand

beat against us by the shovelful, and the air was so thick with it we

couldn't see a thing. In five minutes the boat was level full, and we was

setting on the lockers buried up to the chin in sand, and only our heads

out and could hardly breathe.



Then the storm thinned, and we see that monstrous wall go a-sailing off

across the desert, awful to look at, I tell you. We dug ourselves out and

looked down, and where the caravan was before there wasn't anything but

just the sand ocean now, and all still and quiet. All them people and

camels was smothered and dead and buried--buried under ten foot of sand,

we reckoned, and Tom allowed it might be years before the wind uncovered

them, and all that time their friends wouldn't ever know what become of

that caravan. Tom said:



"NOW we know what it was that happened to the people we got the swords

and pistols from."



Yes, sir, that was just it. It was as plain as day now. They got buried

in a sand-storm, and the wild animals couldn't get at them, and the wind

never uncovered them again until they was dried to leather and warn't fit

to eat. It seemed to me we had felt as sorry for them poor people as a

person could for anybody, and as mournful, too, but we was mistaken; this

last caravan's death went harder with us, a good deal harder. You see,

the others was total strangers, and we never got to feeling acquainted

with them at all, except, maybe, a little with the man that was watching

the girl, but it was different with this last caravan. We was huvvering

around them a whole night and 'most a whole day, and had got to feeling

real friendly with them, and acquainted. I have found out that there

ain't no surer way to find out whether you like people or hate them than

to travel with them. Just so with these. We kind of liked them from the

start, and traveling with them put on the finisher. The longer we

traveled with them, and the more we got used to their ways, the better

and better we liked them, and the gladder and gladder we was that we run

across them. We had come to know some of them so well that we called them

by name when we was talking about them, and soon got so familiar and

sociable that we even dropped the Miss and Mister and just used their

plain names without any handle, and it did not seem unpolite, but just

the right thing. Of course, it wasn't their own names, but names we give

them. There was Mr. Elexander Robinson and Miss Adaline Robinson, and

Colonel Jacob McDougal and Miss Harryet McDougal, and Judge Jeremiah

Butler and young Bushrod Butler, and these was big chiefs mostly that

wore splendid great turbans and simmeters, and dressed like the Grand

Mogul, and their families. But as soon as we come to know them good, and

like them very much, it warn't Mister, nor Judge, nor nothing, any more,

but only Elleck, and Addy, and Jake, and Hattie, and Jerry, and Buck, and

so on.



And you know the more you join in with people in their joys and their

sorrows, the more nearer and dearer they come to be to you. Now we warn't

cold and indifferent, the way most travelers is, we was right down

friendly and sociable, and took a chance in everything that was going,

and the caravan could depend on us to be on hand every time, it didn't

make no difference what it was.



When they camped, we camped right over them, ten or twelve hundred feet

up in the air. When they et a meal, we et ourn, and it made it ever so

much home-liker to have their company. When they had a wedding that

night, and Buck and Addy got married, we got ourselves up in the very

starchiest of the professor's duds for the blow-out, and when they danced

we jined in and shook a foot up there.



But it is sorrow and trouble that brings you the nearest, and it was a

funeral that done it with us. It was next morning, just in the still

dawn. We didn't know the diseased, and he warn't in our set, but that

never made no difference; he belonged to the caravan, and that was

enough, and there warn't no more sincerer tears shed over him than the

ones we dripped on him from up there eleven hundred foot on high.



Yes, parting with this caravan was much more bitterer than it was to part

with them others, which was comparative strangers, and been dead so long,

anyway. We had knowed these in their lives, and was fond of them, too,

and now to have death snatch them from right before our faces while we

was looking, and leave us so lonesome and friendless in the middle of

that big desert, it did hurt so, and we wished we mightn't ever make any

more friends on that voyage if we was going to lose them again like that.



We couldn't keep from talking about them, and they was all the time

coming up in our memory, and looking just the way they looked when we was

all alive and happy together. We could see the line marching, and the

shiny spearheads a-winking in the sun; we could see the dromedaries

lumbering along; we could see the wedding and the funeral; and more

oftener than anything else we could see them praying, because they don't

allow nothing to prevent that; whenever the call come, several times a

day, they would stop right there, and stand up and face to the east, and

lift back their heads, and spread out their arms and begin, and four or

five times they would go down on their knees, and then fall forward and

touch their forehead to the ground.



Well, it warn't good to go on talking about them, lovely as they was in

their life, and dear to us in their life and death both, because it

didn't do no good, and made us too down-hearted. Jim allowed he was going

to live as good a life as he could, so he could see them again in a

better world; and Tom kept still and didn't tell him they was only

Mohammedans; it warn't no use to disappoint him, he was feeling bad

enough just as it was.



When we woke up next morning we was feeling a little cheerfuller, and had

had a most powerful good sleep, because sand is the comfortablest bed

there is, and I don't see why people that can afford it don't have it

more. And it's terrible good ballast, too; I never see the balloon so

steady before.



Tom allowed we had twenty tons of it, and wondered what we better do with

it; it was good sand, and it didn't seem good sense to throw it away. Jim

says:



"Mars Tom, can't we tote it back home en sell it? How long'll it take?"



"Depends on the way we go."



"Well, sah, she's wuth a quarter of a dollar a load at home, en I reckon

we's got as much as twenty loads, hain't we? How much would dat be?"



"Five dollars."



"By jings, Mars Tom, le's shove for home right on de spot! Hit's more'n a

dollar en a half apiece, hain't it?"



"Yes."



"Well, ef dat ain't makin' money de easiest ever I struck! She jes'

rained in--never cos' us a lick o' work. Le's mosey right along, Mars

Tom."



But Tom was thinking and ciphering away so busy and excited he never

heard him. Pretty soon he says:



"Five dollars--sho! Look here, this sand's worth--worth--why, it's worth

no end of money."



"How is dat, Mars Tom? Go on, honey, go on!"



"Well, the minute people knows it's genuwyne sand from the genuwyne

Desert of Sahara, they'll just be in a perfect state of mind to git hold

of some of it to keep on the what-not in a vial with a label on it for a

curiosity. All we got to do is to put it up in vials and float around all

over the United States and peddle them out at ten cents apiece. We've got

all of ten thousand dollars' worth of sand in this boat."



Me and Jim went all to pieces with joy, and begun to shout

whoopjamboreehoo, and Tom says:



"And we can keep on coming back and fetching sand, and coming back and

fetching more sand, and just keep it a-going till we've carted this whole

Desert over there and sold it out; and there ain't ever going to be any

opposition, either, because we'll take out a patent."



"My goodness," I says, "we'll be as rich as Creosote, won't we, Tom?"



"Yes--Creesus, you mean. Why, that dervish was hunting in that little

hill for the treasures of the earth, and didn't know he was walking over

the real ones for a thousand miles. He was blinder than he made the

driver."



"Mars Tom, how much is we gwyne to be worth?"



"Well, I don't know yet. It's got to be ciphered, and it ain't the

easiest job to do, either, because it's over four million square miles of

sand at ten cents a vial."



Jim was awful excited, but this faded it out considerable, and he shook

his head and says:



"Mars Tom, we can't 'ford all dem vials--a king couldn't. We better not

try to take de whole Desert, Mars Tom, de vials gwyne to bust us, sho'."



Tom's excitement died out, too, now, and I reckoned it was on account of

the vials, but it wasn't. He set there thinking, and got bluer and bluer,

and at last he says:



"Boys, it won't work; we got to give it up."



"Why, Tom?"



"On account of the duties."



I couldn't make nothing out of that, neither could Jim. I says:



"What IS our duty, Tom? Because if we can't git around it, why can't we

just DO it? People often has to."



But he says:



"Oh, it ain't that kind of duty. The kind I mean is a tax. Whenever you

strike a frontier--that's the border of a country, you know--you find a

custom-house there, and the gov'ment officers comes and rummages among

your things and charges a big tax, which they call a duty because it's

their duty to bust you if they can, and if you don't pay the duty they'll

hog your sand. They call it confiscating, but that don't deceive nobody,

it's just hogging, and that's all it is. Now if we try to carry this sand

home the way we're pointed now, we got to climb fences till we git

tired--just frontier after frontier--Egypt, Arabia, Hindostan, and so

on, and they'll all whack on a duty, and so you see, easy enough, we

CAN'T go THAT road."



"Why, Tom," I says, "we can sail right over their old frontiers; how are

THEY going to stop us?"



He looked sorrowful at me, and says, very grave:



"Huck Finn, do you think that would be honest?"



I hate them kind of interruptions. I never said nothing, and he went on:



"Well, we're shut off the other way, too. If we go back the way we've

come, there's the New York custom-house, and that is worse than all of

them others put together, on account of the kind of cargo we've got."



"Why?"



"Well, they can't raise Sahara sand in America, of course, and when they

can't raise a thing there, the duty is fourteen hundred thousand per

cent. on it if you try to fetch it in from where they do raise it."



"There ain't no sense in that, Tom Sawyer."



"Who said there WAS? What do you talk to me like that for, Huck Finn? You

wait till I say a thing's got sense in it before you go to accusing me of

saying it."



"All right, consider me crying about it, and sorry. Go on."



Jim says:



"Mars Tom, do dey jam dat duty onto everything we can't raise in America,

en don't make no 'stinction 'twix' anything?"



"Yes, that's what they do."



"Mars Tom, ain't de blessin' o' de Lord de mos' valuable thing dey is?"



"Yes, it is."



"Don't de preacher stan' up in de pulpit en call it down on de people?"



"Yes."



"Whah do it come from?"



"From heaven."



"Yassir! you's jes' right, 'deed you is, honey--it come from heaven, en

dat's a foreign country. NOW, den! do dey put a tax on dat blessin'?"



"No, they don't."



"Course dey don't; en so it stan' to reason dat you's mistaken, Mars Tom.

Dey wouldn't put de tax on po' truck like san', dat everybody ain't

'bleeged to have, en leave it off'n de bes' thing dey is, which nobody

can't git along widout."



Tom Sawyer was stumped; he see Jim had got him where he couldn't budge.

He tried to wiggle out by saying they had FORGOT to put on that tax, but

they'd be sure to remember about it, next session of Congress, and then

they'd put it on, but that was a poor lame come-off, and he knowed it. He

said there warn't nothing foreign that warn't taxed but just that one,

and so they couldn't be consistent without taxing it, and to be

consistent was the first law of politics. So he stuck to it that they'd

left it out unintentional and would be certain to do their best to fix it

before they got caught and laughed at.



But I didn't feel no more interest in such things, as long as we couldn't

git our sand through, and it made me low-spirited, and Jim the same. Tom

he tried to cheer us up by saying he would think up another speculation

for us that would be just as good as this one and better, but it didn't

do no good, we didn't believe there was any as big as this. It was mighty

hard; such a little while ago we was so rich, and could 'a' bought a

country and started a kingdom and been celebrated and happy, and now we

was so poor and ornery again, and had our sand left on our hands. The

sand was looking so lovely before, just like gold and di'monds, and the

feel of it was so soft and so silky and nice, but now I couldn't bear the

sight of it, it made me sick to look at it, and I knowed I wouldn't ever

feel comfortable again till we got shut of it, and I didn't have it there

no more to remind us of what we had been and what we had got degraded

down to. The others was feeling the same way about it that I was. I

knowed it, because they cheered up so, the minute I says le's throw this

truck overboard.



Well, it was going to be work, you know, and pretty solid work, too; so

Tom he divided it up according to fairness and strength. He said me and

him would clear out a fifth apiece of the sand, and Jim three-fifths. Jim

he didn't quite like that arrangement. He says:



"Course I's de stronges', en I's willin' to do a share accordin', but by

jings you's kinder pilin' it onto ole Jim, Mars Tom, hain't you?"



"Well, I didn't think so, Jim, but you try your hand at fixing it, and

let's see."



So Jim reckoned it wouldn't be no more than fair if me and Tom done a

TENTH apiece. Tom he turned his back to git room and be private, and then

he smole a smile that spread around and covered the whole Sahara to the

westward, back to the Atlantic edge of it where we come from. Then he

turned around again and said it was a good enough arrangement, and we was

satisfied if Jim was. Jim said he was.



So then Tom measured off our two-tenths in the bow and left the rest for

Jim, and it surprised Jim a good deal to see how much difference there

was and what a raging lot of sand his share come to, and said he was

powerful glad now that he had spoke up in time and got the first

arrangement altered, for he said that even the way it was now, there was

more sand than enjoyment in his end of the contract, he believed.



Then we laid into it. It was mighty hot work, and tough; so hot we had to

move up into cooler weather or we couldn't 'a' stood it. Me and Tom took

turn about, and one worked while t'other rested, but there warn't nobody

to spell poor old Jim, and he made all that part of Africa damp, he

sweated so. We couldn't work good, we was so full of laugh, and Jim he

kept fretting and wanting to know what tickled us so, and we had to keep

making up things to account for it, and they was pretty poor inventions,

but they done well enough, Jim didn't see through them. At last when we

got done we was 'most dead, but not with work but with laughing. By and

by Jim was 'most dead, too, but: it was with work; then we took turns and

spelled him, and he was as thankfull as he could be, and would set on the

gunnel and swab the sweat, and heave and pant, and say how good we was to

a poor old nigger, and he wouldn't ever forgit us. He was always the

gratefulest nigger I ever see, for any little thing you done for him. He

was only nigger outside; inside he was as white as you be.







 CHAPTER XII. JIM STANDING SIEGE



THE next few meals was pretty sandy, but that don't make no difference

when you are hungry; and when you ain't it ain't no satisfaction to eat,

anyway, and so a little grit in the meat ain't no particular drawback, as

far as I can see.



Then we struck the east end of the Desert at last, sailing on a northeast

course. Away off on the edge of the sand, in a soft pinky light, we see

three little sharp roofs like tents, and Tom says:



"It's the pyramids of Egypt."



It made my heart fairly jump. You see, I had seen a many and a many a

picture of them, and heard tell about them a hundred times, and yet to

come on them all of a sudden, that way, and find they was REAL, 'stead of

imaginations, 'most knocked the breath out of me with surprise. It's a

curious thing, that the more you hear about a grand and big and bully

thing or person, the more it kind of dreamies out, as you may say, and

gets to be a big dim wavery figger made out of moonshine and nothing

solid to it. It's just so with George Washington, and the same with them

pyramids.



And moreover, besides, the thing they always said about them seemed to me

to be stretchers. There was a feller come to the Sunday-school once, and

had a picture of them, and made a speech, and said the biggest pyramid

covered thirteen acres, and was most five hundred foot high, just a steep

mountain, all built out of hunks of stone as big as a bureau, and laid up

in perfectly regular layers, like stair-steps. Thirteen acres, you see,

for just one building; it's a farm. If it hadn't been in Sunday-school, I

would 'a' judged it was a lie; and outside I was certain of it. And he

said there was a hole in the pyramid, and you could go in there with

candles, and go ever so far up a long slanting tunnel, and come to a

large room in the stomach of that stone mountain, and there you would

find a big stone chest with a king in it, four thousand years old. I said

to myself, then, if that ain't a lie I will eat that king if they will

fetch him, for even Methusalem warn't that old, and nobody claims it.



As we come a little nearer we see the yaller sand come to an end in a

long straight edge like a blanket, and on to it was joined, edge to edge,

a wide country of bright green, with a snaky stripe crooking through it,

and Tom said it was the Nile. It made my heart jump again, for the Nile

was another thing that wasn't real to me. Now I can tell you one thing

which is dead certain: if you will fool along over three thousand miles

of yaller sand, all glimmering with heat so that it makes your eyes water

to look at it, and you've been a considerable part of a week doing it,

the green country will look so like home and heaven to you that it will

make your eyes water AGAIN.



It was just so with me, and the same with Jim.



And when Jim got so he could believe it WAS the land of Egypt he was

looking at, he wouldn't enter it standing up, but got down on his knees

and took off his hat, because he said it wasn't fitten' for a humble poor

nigger to come any other way where such men had been as Moses and Joseph

and Pharaoh and the other prophets. He was a Presbyterian, and had a most

deep respect for Moses which was a Presbyterian, too, he said. He was all

stirred up, and says:



"Hit's de lan' of Egypt, de lan' of Egypt, en I's 'lowed to look at it

wid my own eyes! En dah's de river dat was turn' to blood, en I's looking

at de very same groun' whah de plagues was, en de lice, en de frogs, en

de locus', en de hail, en whah dey marked de door-pos', en de angel o' de

Lord come by in de darkness o' de night en slew de fust-born in all de

lan' o' Egypt. Ole Jim ain't worthy to see dis day!"



And then he just broke down and cried, he was so thankful. So between him

and Tom there was talk enough, Jim being excited because the land was so

full of history--Joseph and his brethren, Moses in the bulrushers, Jacob

coming down into Egypt to buy corn, the silver cup in the sack, and all

them interesting things; and Tom just as excited too, because the land

was so full of history that was in HIS line, about Noureddin, and

Bedreddin, and such like monstrous giants, that made Jim's wool rise, and

a raft of other Arabian Nights folks, which the half of them never done

the things they let on they done, I don't believe.



Then we struck a disappointment, for one of them early morning fogs

started up, and it warn't no use to sail over the top of it, because we

would go by Egypt, sure, so we judged it was best to set her by compass

straight for the place where the pyramids was gitting blurred and blotted

out, and then drop low and skin along pretty close to the ground and keep

a sharp lookout. Tom took the hellum, I stood by to let go the anchor,

and Jim he straddled the bow to dig through the fog with his eyes and

watch out for danger ahead. We went along a steady gait, but not very

fast, and the fog got solider and solider, so solid that Jim looked dim

and ragged and smoky through it. It was awful still, and we talked low

and was anxious. Now and then Jim would say:



"Highst her a p'int, Mars Tom, highst her!" and up she would skip, a foot

or two, and we would slide right over a flat-roofed mud cabin, with

people that had been asleep on it just beginning to turn out and gap and

stretch; and once when a feller was clear up on his hind legs so he could

gap and stretch better, we took him a blip in the back and knocked him

off. By and by, after about an hour, and everything dead still and we

a-straining our ears for sounds and holding our breath, the fog thinned a

little, very sudden, and Jim sung out in an awful scare:



"Oh, for de lan's sake, set her back, Mars Tom, here's de biggest giant

outen de 'Rabian Nights a-comin' for us!" and he went over backwards in

the boat.



Tom slammed on the back-action, and as we slowed to a standstill a man's

face as big as our house at home looked in over the gunnel, same as a

house looks out of its windows, and I laid down and died. I must 'a' been

clear dead and gone for as much as a minute or more; then I come to, and

Tom had hitched a boat-hook on to the lower lip of the giant and was

holding the balloon steady with it whilst he canted his head back and got

a good long look up at that awful face.



Jim was on his knees with his hands clasped, gazing up at the thing in a

begging way, and working his lips, but not getting anything out. I took

only just a glimpse, and was fading out again, but Tom says:



"He ain't alive, you fools; it's the Sphinx!"



I never see Tom look so little and like a fly; but that was because the

giant's head was so big and awful. Awful, yes, so it was, but not

dreadful any more, because you could see it was a noble face, and kind of

sad, and not thinking about you, but about other things and larger. It

was stone, reddish stone, and its nose and ears battered, and that give

it an abused look, and you felt sorrier for it for that.



We stood off a piece, and sailed around it and over it, and it was just

grand. It was a man's head, or maybe a woman's, on a tiger's body a

hundred and twenty-five foot long, and there was a dear little temple

between its front paws. All but the head used to be under the sand, for

hundreds of years, maybe thousands, but they had just lately dug the sand

away and found that little temple. It took a power of sand to bury that

cretur; most as much as it would to bury a steamboat, I reckon.



We landed Jim on top of the head, with an American flag to protect him,

it being a foreign land; then we sailed off to this and that and t'other

distance, to git what Tom called effects and perspectives and

proportions, and Jim he done the best he could, striking all the

different kinds of attitudes and positions he could study up, but

standing on his head and working his legs the way a frog does was the

best. The further we got away, the littler Jim got, and the grander the

Sphinx got, till at last it was only a clothespin on a dome, as you might

say. That's the way perspective brings out the correct proportions, Tom

said; he said Julus Cesar's niggers didn't know how big he was, they was

too close to him.



Then we sailed off further and further, till we couldn't see Jim at all

any more, and then that great figger was at its noblest, a-gazing out

over the Nile Valley so still and solemn and lonesome, and all the little

shabby huts and things that was scattered about it clean disappeared and

gone, and nothing around it now but a soft wide spread of yaller velvet,

which was the sand.



That was the right place to stop, and we done it. We set there a-looking

and a-thinking for a half an hour, nobody a-saying anything, for it made

us feel quiet and kind of solemn to remember it had been looking over

that valley just that same way, and thinking its awful thoughts all to

itself for thousands of years, and nobody can't find out what they are to

this day.



At last I took up the glass and see some little black things a-capering

around on that velvet carpet, and some more a-climbing up the cretur's

back, and then I see two or three wee puffs of white smoke, and told Tom

to look. He done it, and says:



"They're bugs. No--hold on; they--why, I believe they're men. Yes, it's

men--men and horses both. They're hauling a long ladder up onto the

Sphinx's back--now ain't that odd? And now they're trying to lean it up

a--there's some more puffs of smoke--it's guns! Huck, they're after Jim."



We clapped on the power, and went for them a-biling. We was there in no

time, and come a-whizzing down amongst them, and they broke and scattered

every which way, and some that was climbing the ladder after Jim let go

all holts and fell. We soared up and found him laying on top of the head

panting and most tuckered out, partly from howling for help and partly

from scare. He had been standing a siege a long time--a week, HE said,

but it warn't so, it only just seemed so to him because they was crowding

him so. They had shot at him, and rained the bullets all around him, but

he warn't hit, and when they found he wouldn't stand up and the bullets

couldn't git at him when he was laying down, they went for the ladder,

and then he knowed it was all up with him if we didn't come pretty quick.

Tom was very indignant, and asked him why he didn't show the flag and

command them to GIT, in the name of the United States. Jim said he done

it, but they never paid no attention. Tom said he would have this thing

looked into at Washington, and says:



"You'll see that they'll have to apologize for insulting the flag, and

pay an indemnity, too, on top of it even if they git off THAT easy."



Jim says:



"What's an indemnity, Mars Tom?"



"It's cash, that's what it is."



"Who gits it, Mars Tom?"



"Why, WE do."



"En who gits de apology?"



"The United States. Or, we can take whichever we please. We can take the

apology, if we want to, and let the gov'ment take the money."



"How much money will it be, Mars Tom?"



"Well, in an aggravated case like this one, it will be at least three

dollars apiece, and I don't know but more."



"Well, den, we'll take de money, Mars Tom, blame de 'pology. Hain't dat

yo' notion, too? En hain't it yourn, Huck?"



We talked it over a little and allowed that that was as good a way as

any, so we agreed to take the money. It was a new business to me, and I

asked Tom if countries always apologized when they had done wrong, and he

says:



"Yes; the little ones does."



We was sailing around examining the pyramids, you know, and now we soared

up and roosted on the flat top of the biggest one, and found it was just

like what the man said in the Sunday-school. It was like four pairs of

stairs that starts broad at the bottom and slants up and comes together

in a point at the top, only these stair-steps couldn't be clumb the way

you climb other stairs; no, for each step was as high as your chin, and

you have to be boosted up from behind. The two other pyramids warn't far

away, and the people moving about on the sand between looked like bugs

crawling, we was so high above them.



Tom he couldn't hold himself he was so worked up with gladness and

astonishment to be in such a celebrated place, and he just dripped

history from every pore, seemed to me. He said he couldn't scarcely

believe he was standing on the very identical spot the prince flew from

on the Bronze Horse. It was in the Arabian Night times, he said. Somebody

give the prince a bronze horse with a peg in its shoulder, and he could

git on him and fly through the air like a bird, and go all over the

world, and steer it by turning the peg, and fly high or low and land

wherever he wanted to.



When he got done telling it there was one of them uncomfortable silences

that comes, you know, when a person has been telling a whopper and you

feel sorry for him and wish you could think of some way to change the

subject and let him down easy, but git stuck and don't see no way, and

before you can pull your mind together and DO something, that silence has

got in and spread itself and done the business. I was embarrassed, Jim he

was embarrassed, and neither of us couldn't say a word. Well, Tom he

glowered at me a minute, and says:



"Come, out with it. What do you think?"



I says:



"Tom Sawyer, YOU don't believe that, yourself."



"What's the reason I don't? What's to hender me?"



"There's one thing to hender you: it couldn't happen, that's all."



"What's the reason it couldn't happen?"



"You tell me the reason it COULD happen."



"This balloon is a good enough reason it could happen, I should reckon."



"WHY is it?"



"WHY is it? I never saw such an idiot. Ain't this balloon and the bronze

horse the same thing under different names?"



"No, they're not. One is a balloon and the other's a horse. It's very

different. Next you'll be saying a house and a cow is the same thing."



"By Jackson, Huck's got him ag'in! Dey ain't no wigglin' outer dat!"



"Shut your head, Jim; you don't know what you're talking about. And Huck

don't. Look here, Huck, I'll make it plain to you, so you can understand.

You see, it ain't the mere FORM that's got anything to do with their

being similar or unsimilar, it's the PRINCIPLE involved; and the

principle is the same in both. Don't you see, now?"



I turned it over in my mind, and says:



"Tom, it ain't no use. Principles is all very well, but they don't git

around that one big fact, that the thing that a balloon can do ain't no

sort of proof of what a horse can do."



"Shucks, Huck, you don't get the idea at all. Now look here a

minute--it's perfectly plain. Don't we fly through the air?"



"Yes."



"Very well. Don't we fly high or fly low, just as we please?"



"Yes."



"Don't we steer whichever way we want to?"



"Yes."



"And don't we land when and where we please?"



"Yes."



"How do we move the balloon and steer it?"



"By touching the buttons."



"NOW I reckon the thing is clear to you at last. In the other case the

moving and steering was done by turning a peg. We touch a button, the

prince turned a peg. There ain't an atom of difference, you see. I knowed

I could git it through your head if I stuck to it long enough."



He felt so happy he begun to whistle. But me and Jim was silent, so he

broke off surprised, and says:



"Looky here, Huck Finn, don't you see it YET?"



I says:



"Tom Sawyer, I want to ask you some questions."



"Go ahead," he says, and I see Jim chirk up to listen.



"As I understand it, the whole thing is in the buttons and the peg--the

rest ain't of no consequence. A button is one shape, a peg is another

shape, but that ain't any matter?"



"No, that ain't any matter, as long as they've both got the same power."



"All right, then. What is the power that's in a candle and in a match?"



"It's the fire."



"It's the same in both, then?"



"Yes, just the same in both."



"All right. Suppose I set fire to a carpenter shop with a match, what

will happen to that carpenter shop?"



"She'll burn up."



"And suppose I set fire to this pyramid with a candle--will she burn up?"



"Of course she won't."



"All right. Now the fire's the same, both times. WHY does the shop burn,

and the pyramid don't?"



"Because the pyramid CAN'T burn."



"Aha! and A HORSE CAN'T FLY!"



"My lan', ef Huck ain't got him ag'in! Huck's landed him high en dry dis

time, I tell you! Hit's de smartes' trap I ever see a body walk inter--en

ef I--"



But Jim was so full of laugh he got to strangling and couldn't go on, and

Tom was that mad to see how neat I had floored him, and turned his own

argument ag'in him and knocked him all to rags and flinders with it, that

all he could manage to say was that whenever he heard me and Jim try to

argue it made him ashamed of the human race. I never said nothing; I was

feeling pretty well satisfied. When I have got the best of a person that

way, it ain't my way to go around crowing about it the way some people

does, for I consider that if I was in his place I wouldn't wish him to

crow over me. It's better to be generous, that's what I think.







 CHAPTER XIII. GOING FOR TOM'S PIPE:



BY AND BY we left Jim to float around up there in the neighborhood of the

pyramids, and we clumb down to the hole where you go into the tunnel, and

went in with some Arabs and candles, and away in there in the middle of

the pyramid we found a room and a big stone box in it where they used to

keep that king, just as the man in the Sunday-school said; but he was

gone, now; somebody had got him. But I didn't take no interest in the

place, because there could be ghosts there, of course; not fresh ones,

but I don't like no kind.



So then we come out and got some little donkeys and rode a piece, and

then went in a boat another piece, and then more donkeys, and got to

Cairo; and all the way the road was as smooth and beautiful a road as

ever I see, and had tall date-pa'ms on both sides, and naked children

everywhere, and the men was as red as copper, and fine and strong and

handsome. And the city was a curiosity. Such narrow streets--why, they

were just lanes, and crowded with people with turbans, and women with

veils, and everybody rigged out in blazing bright clothes and all sorts

of colors, and you wondered how the camels and the people got by each

other in such narrow little cracks, but they done it--a perfect jam, you

see, and everybody noisy. The stores warn't big enough to turn around in,

but you didn't have to go in; the storekeeper sat tailor fashion on his

counter, smoking his snaky long pipe, and had his things where he could

reach them to sell, and he was just as good as in the street, for the

camel-loads brushed him as they went by.



Now and then a grand person flew by in a carriage with fancy dressed men

running and yelling in front of it and whacking anybody with a long rod

that didn't get out of the way. And by and by along comes the Sultan

riding horseback at the head of a procession, and fairly took your breath

away his clothes was so splendid; and everybody fell flat and laid on his

stomach while he went by. I forgot, but a feller helped me to remember.

He was one that had a rod and run in front.



There was churches, but they don't know enough to keep Sunday; they keep

Friday and break the Sabbath. You have to take off your shoes when you go

in. There was crowds of men and boys in the church, setting in groups on

the stone floor and making no end of noise--getting their lessons by

heart, Tom said, out of the Koran, which they think is a Bible, and

people that knows better knows enough to not let on. I never see such a

big church in my life before, and most awful high, it was; it made you

dizzy to look up; our village church at home ain't a circumstance to it;

if you was to put it in there, people would think it was a drygoods box.



What I wanted to see was a dervish, because I was interested in dervishes

on accounts of the one that played the trick on the camel-driver. So we

found a lot in a kind of a church, and they called themselves Whirling

Dervishes; and they did whirl, too. I never see anything like it. They

had tall sugar-loaf hats on, and linen petticoats; and they spun and spun

and spun, round and round like tops, and the petticoats stood out on a

slant, and it was the prettiest thing I ever see, and made me drunk to

look at it. They was all Moslems, Tom said, and when I asked him what a

Moslem was, he said it was a person that wasn't a Presbyterian. So there

is plenty of them in Missouri, though I didn't know it before.



We didn't see half there was to see in Cairo, because Tom was in such a

sweat to hunt out places that was celebrated in history. We had a most

tiresome time to find the granary where Joseph stored up the grain before

the famine, and when we found it it warn't worth much to look at, being

such an old tumble-down wreck; but Tom was satisfied, and made more fuss

over it than I would make if I stuck a nail in my foot. How he ever found

that place was too many for me. We passed as much as forty just like it

before we come to it, and any of them would 'a' done for me, but none but

just the right one would suit him; I never see anybody so particular as

Tom Sawyer. The minute he struck the right one he reconnized it as easy

as I would reconnize my other shirt if I had one, but how he done it he

couldn't any more tell than he could fly; he said so himself.



Then we hunted a long time for the house where the boy lived that learned

the cadi how to try the case of the old olives and the new ones, and said

it was out of the Arabian Nights, and he would tell me and Jim about it

when he got time. Well, we hunted and hunted till I was ready to drop,

and I wanted Tom to give it up and come next day and git somebody that

knowed the town and could talk Missourian and could go straight to the

place; but no, he wanted to find it himself, and nothing else would

answer. So on we went. Then at last the remarkablest thing happened I

ever see. The house was gone--gone hundreds of years ago--every last rag

of it gone but just one mud brick. Now a person wouldn't ever believe

that a backwoods Missouri boy that hadn't ever been in that town before

could go and hunt that place over and find that brick, but Tom Sawyer

done it. I know he done it, because I see him do it. I was right by his

very side at the time, and see him see the brick and see him reconnize

it. Well, I says to myself, how DOES he do it? Is it knowledge, or is it

instink?



Now there's the facts, just as they happened: let everybody explain it

their own way. I've ciphered over it a good deal, and it's my opinion

that some of it is knowledge but the main bulk of it is instink. The

reason is this: Tom put the brick in his pocket to give to a museum with

his name on it and the facts when he went home, and I slipped it out and

put another brick considerable like it in its place, and he didn't know

the difference--but there was a difference, you see. I think that settles

it--it's mostly instink, not knowledge. Instink tells him where the exact

PLACE is for the brick to be in, and so he reconnizes it by the place

it's in, not by the look of the brick. If it was knowledge, not instink,

he would know the brick again by the look of it the next time he seen

it--which he didn't. So it shows that for all the brag you hear about

knowledge being such a wonderful thing, instink is worth forty of it for

real unerringness. Jim says the same.



When we got back Jim dropped down and took us in, and there was a young

man there with a red skullcap and tassel on and a beautiful silk jacket

and baggy trousers with a shawl around his waist and pistols in it that

could talk English and wanted to hire to us as guide and take us to Mecca

and Medina and Central Africa and everywheres for a half a dollar a day

and his keep, and we hired him and left, and piled on the power, and by

the time we was through dinner we was over the place where the Israelites

crossed the Red Sea when Pharaoh tried to overtake them and was caught by

the waters. We stopped, then, and had a good look at the place, and it

done Jim good to see it. He said he could see it all, now, just the way

it happened; he could see the Israelites walking along between the walls

of water, and the Egyptians coming, from away off yonder, hurrying all

they could, and see them start in as the Israelites went out, and then

when they was all in, see the walls tumble together and drown the last

man of them. Then we piled on the power again and rushed away and

huvvered over Mount Sinai, and saw the place where Moses broke the tables

of stone, and where the children of Israel camped in the plain and

worshiped the golden calf, and it was all just as interesting as could

be, and the guide knowed every place as well as I knowed the village at

home.



But we had an accident, now, and it fetched all the plans to a

standstill. Tom's old ornery corn-cob pipe had got so old and swelled and

warped that she couldn't hold together any longer, notwithstanding the

strings and bandages, but caved in and went to pieces. Tom he didn't know

WHAT to do. The professor's pipe wouldn't answer; it warn't anything but

a mershum, and a person that's got used to a cob pipe knows it lays a

long ways over all the other pipes in this world, and you can't git him

to smoke any other. He wouldn't take mine, I couldn't persuade him. So

there he was.



He thought it over, and said we must scour around and see if we could

roust out one in Egypt or Arabia or around in some of these countries,

but the guide said no, it warn't no use, they didn't have them. So Tom

was pretty glum for a little while, then he chirked up and said he'd got

the idea and knowed what to do. He says:



"I've got another corn-cob pipe, and it's a prime one, too, and nearly

new. It's laying on the rafter that's right over the kitchen stove at

home in the village. Jim, you and the guide will go and get it, and me

and Huck will camp here on Mount Sinai till you come back."



"But, Mars Tom, we couldn't ever find de village. I could find de pipe,

'case I knows de kitchen, but my lan', we can't ever find de village, nur

Sent Louis, nur none o' dem places. We don't know de way, Mars Tom."



That was a fact, and it stumped Tom for a minute. Then he said:



"Looky here, it can be done, sure; and I'll tell you how. You set your

compass and sail west as straight as a dart, till you find the United

States. It ain't any trouble, because it's the first land you'll strike

the other side of the Atlantic. If it's daytime when you strike it, bulge

right on, straight west from the upper part of the Florida coast, and in

an hour and three quarters you'll hit the mouth of the Mississippi--at

the speed that I'm going to send you. You'll be so high up in the air

that the earth will be curved considerable--sorter like a washbowl turned

upside down--and you'll see a raft of rivers crawling around every which

way, long before you get there, and you can pick out the Mississippi

without any trouble. Then you can follow the river north nearly, an hour

and three quarters, till you see the Ohio come in; then you want to look

sharp, because you're getting near. Away up to your left you'll see

another thread coming in--that's the Missouri and is a little above St.

Louis. You'll come down low then, so as you can examine the villages as

you spin along. You'll pass about twenty-five in the next fifteen

minutes, and you'll recognize ours when you see it--and if you don't, you

can yell down and ask."



"Ef it's dat easy, Mars Tom, I reckon we kin do it--yassir, I knows we

kin."



The guide was sure of it, too, and thought that he could learn to stand

his watch in a little while.



"Jim can learn you the whole thing in a half an hour," Tom said. "This

balloon's as easy to manage as a canoe."



Tom got out the chart and marked out the course and measured it, and

says:



"To go back west is the shortest way, you see. It's only about seven

thousand miles. If you went east, and so on around, it's over twice as

far." Then he says to the guide, "I want you both to watch the tell-tale

all through the watches, and whenever it don't mark three hundred miles

an hour, you go higher or drop lower till you find a storm-current that's

going your way. There's a hundred miles an hour in this old thing without

any wind to help. There's two-hundred-mile gales to be found, any time

you want to hunt for them."



"We'll hunt for them, sir."



"See that you do. Sometimes you may have to go up a couple of miles, and

it'll be p'ison cold, but most of the time you'll find your storm a good

deal lower. If you can only strike a cyclone--that's the ticket for you!

You'll see by the professor's books that they travel west in these

latitudes; and they travel low, too."



Then he ciphered on the time, and says--



"Seven thousand miles, three hundred miles an hour--you can make the trip

in a day--twenty-four hours. This is Thursday; you'll be back here

Saturday afternoon. Come, now, hustle out some blankets and food and

books and things for me and Huck, and you can start right along. There

ain't no occasion to fool around--I want a smoke, and the quicker you

fetch that pipe the better."



All hands jumped for the things, and in eight minutes our things was out

and the balloon was ready for America. So we shook hands good-bye, and

Tom gave his last orders:



"It's 10 minutes to 2 P.M. now, Mount Sinai time. In 24 hours you'll be

home, and it'll be 6 to-morrow morning, village time. When you strike the

village, land a little back of the top of the hill, in the woods, out of

sight; then you rush down, Jim, and shove these letters in the

post-office, and if you see anybody stirring, pull your slouch down over

your face so they won't know you. Then you go and slip in the back way to

the kitchen and git the pipe, and lay this piece of paper on the kitchen

table, and put something on it to hold it, and then slide out and git

away, and don't let Aunt Polly catch a sight of you, nor nobody else.

Then you jump for the balloon and shove for Mount Sinai three hundred

miles an hour. You won't have lost more than an hour. You'll start back

at 7 or 8 A.M., village time, and be here in 24 hours, arriving at 2 or 3

P.M., Mount Sinai time."



Tom he read the piece of paper to us. He had wrote on it:



     "THURSDAY AFTERNOON. Tom Sawyer the Erro-nort

     sends his love to Aunt Polly from Mount Sinai

     where the Ark was, and so does Huck Finn, and she

     will get it to-morrow morning half-past six." *



  [* This misplacing of the Ark is probably Huck's   error, not

Tom's.--M.T.]



"That'll make her eyes bulge out and the tears come," he says. Then he

says:



"Stand by! One--two--three--away you go!"



And away she DID go! Why, she seemed to whiz out of sight in a second.



Then we found a most comfortable cave that looked out over the whole big

plain, and there we camped to wait for the pipe.



The balloon come hack all right, and brung the pipe; but Aunt Polly had

catched Jim when he was getting it, and anybody can guess what happened:

she sent for Tom. So Jim he says:



"Mars Tom, she's out on de porch wid her eye sot on de sky a-layin' for

you, en she say she ain't gwyne to budge from dah tell she gits hold of

you. Dey's gwyne to be trouble, Mars Tom, 'deed dey is."



So then we shoved for home, and not feeling very gay, neither.



END.





End of Project Gutenberg's Tom Sawyer Abroad, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













THE TRAGEDY OF PUDD'NHEAD WILSON



by Mark Twain









A WHISPER TO THE READER



There is no character, howsoever good and fine, but it can be destroyed

by ridicule, howsoever poor and witless. Observe the ass, for instance:

his character is about perfect, he is the choicest spirit among all the

humbler animals, yet see what ridicule has brought him to.  Instead of

feeling complimented when we are called an ass, we are left in doubt.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



A person who is ignorant of legal matters is always liable to make

mistakes when he tries to photograph a court scene with his pen; and so I

was not willing to let the law chapters in this book go to press without

first subjecting them to rigid and exhausting revision and correction by

a trained barrister--if that is what they are called.  These chapters are

right, now, in every detail, for they were rewritten under the immediate

eye of William Hicks, who studied law part of a while in southwest

Missouri thirty-five years ago and then came over here to Florence for

his health and is still helping for exercise and board in Macaroni

Vermicelli's horse-feed shed, which is up the back alley as you turn

around the corner out of the Piazza del Duomo just beyond the house where

that stone that Dante used to sit on six hundred years ago is let into

the wall when he let on to be watching them build Giotto's campanile and

yet always got tired looking as Beatrice passed along on her way to get a

chunk of chestnut cake to defend herself with in case of a Ghibelline

outbreak before she got to school, at the same old stand where they sell

the same old cake to this day and it is just as light and good as it was

then, too, and this is not flattery, far from it. He was a little rusty

on his law, but he rubbed up for this book, and those two or three legal

chapters are right and straight, now. He told me so himself.



Given under my hand this second day of January, 1893, at the Villa

Viviani, village of Settignano, three miles back of Florence, on the

hills--the same certainly affording the most charming view to be found

on this planet, and with it the most dreamlike and enchanting sunsets to

be found in any planet or even in any solar system--and given, too, in

the swell room of the house, with the busts of Cerretani senators and

other grandees of this line looking approvingly down upon me, as they

used to look down upon Dante, and mutely asking me to adopt them into my

family, which I do with pleasure, for my remotest ancestors are but

spring chickens compared with these robed and stately antiques, and it

will be a great and satisfying lift for me, that six hundred years will.



Mark Twain.









CHAPTER 1



Pudd'nhead Wins His Name



Tell the truth or trump--but get the trick.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



The scene of this chronicle is the town of Dawson's Landing, on the

Missouri side of the Mississippi, half a day's journey, per steamboat,

below St. Louis.



In 1830 it was a snug collection of modest one- and two- story frame

dwellings, whose whitewashed exteriors were almost concealed from sight

by climbing tangles of rose vines, honeysuckles, and morning glories.

Each of these pretty homes had a garden in front fenced with white

palings and opulently stocked with hollyhocks, marigolds, touch-me-nots,

prince's-feathers, and other old-fashioned flowers; while on the

windowsills of the houses stood wooden boxes containing moss rose plants

and terra-cotta pots in which grew a breed of geranium whose spread of

intensely red blossoms accented the prevailing pink tint of the rose-clad

house-front like an explosion of flame.  When there was room on the ledge

outside of the pots and boxes for a cat, the cat was there--in sunny

weather--stretched at full length, asleep and blissful, with her furry

belly to the sun and a paw curved over her nose. Then that house was

complete, and its contentment and peace were made manifest to the world

by this symbol, whose testimony is infallible. A home without a cat--and

a well-fed, well-petted, and properly revered cat--may be a perfect

home, perhaps, but how can it prove title?



All along the streets, on both sides, at the outer edge of the brick

sidewalks, stood locust trees with trunks protected by wooden boxing, and

these furnished shade for summer and a sweet fragrancer in spring, when

the clusters of buds came forth.  The main street, one block back from

the river, and running parallel with it, was the sole business street.

It was six blocks long, and in each block two or three brick stores,

three stories high, towered above interjected bunches of little frame

shops.  Swinging signs creaked in the wind the street's whole length.

The candy-striped pole, which indicates nobility proud and ancient along

the palace-bordered canals of Venice, indicated merely the humble

barbershop along the main street of Dawson's Landing. On a chief corner

stood a lofty unpainted pole wreathed from top to bottom with tin pots

and pans and cups, the chief tinmonger's noisy notice to the world (when

the wind blew) that his shop was on hand for business at that corner.



The hamlet's front was washed by the clear waters of the great river; its

body stretched itself rearward up a gentle incline; its most rearward

border fringed itself out and scattered its houses about its base line of

the hills; the hills rose high, enclosing the town in a half-moon curve,

clothed with forests from foot to summit.



Steamboats passed up and down every hour or so.  Those belonging to the

little Cairo line and the little Memphis line always stopped; the big

Orleans liners stopped for hails only, or to land passengers or freight;

and this was the case also with the great flotilla of "transients."

These latter came out of a dozen rivers--the Illinois, the Missouri, the

Upper Mississippi, the Ohio, the Monongahela, the Tennessee, the Red

River, the White River, and so on--and were bound every whither and

stocked with every imaginable comfort or necessity, which the

Mississippi's communities could want, from the frosty Falls of St.

Anthony down through nine climates to torrid New Orleans.



Dawson's Landing was a slaveholding town, with a rich, slave-worked grain

and pork country back of it.  The town was sleepy and comfortable and

contented.  It was fifty years old, and was growing slowly--very slowly,

in fact, but still it was growing.



The chief citizen was York Leicester Driscoll, about forty years old,

judge of the county court.  He was very proud of his old Virginian

ancestry, and in his hospitalities and his rather formal and stately

manners, he kept up its traditions.  He was fine and just and generous.

To be a gentleman--a gentleman without stain or blemish--was his only

religion, and to it he was always faithful.  He was respected, esteemed,

and beloved by all of the community.  He was well off, and was gradually

adding to his store.  He and his wife were very nearly happy, but not

quite, for they had no children.  The longing for the treasure of a child

had grown stronger and stronger as the years slipped away, but the

blessing never came--and was never to come.



With this pair lived the judge's widowed sister, Mrs. Rachel Pratt, and

she also was childless--childless, and sorrowful for that reason, and not

to be comforted.  The women were good and commonplace people, and did

their duty, and had their reward in clear consciences and the community's

approbation.  They were Presbyterians, the judge was a freethinker.



Pembroke Howard, lawyer and bachelor, aged almost forty, was another old

Virginian grandee with proved descent from the First Families. He was a

fine, majestic creature, a gentleman according to the nicest requirements

of the Virginia rule, a devoted Presbyterian, an authority on the "code",

and a man always courteously ready to stand up before you in the field if

any act or word of his had seemed doubtful or suspicious to you, and

explain it with any weapon you might prefer from bradawls to artillery.

He was very popular with the people, and was the judge's dearest friend.



Then there was Colonel Cecil Burleigh Essex, another F.F.V. of formidable

caliber--however, with him we have no concern.



Percy Northumberland Driscoll, brother to the judge, and younger than he

by five years, was a married man, and had had children around his

hearthstone; but they were attacked in detail by measles, croup, and

scarlet fever, and this had given the doctor a chance with his effective

antediluvian methods; so the cradles were empty.  He was a prosperous

man, with a good head for speculations, and his fortune was growing.  On

the first of February, 1830, two boy babes were born in his house; one to

him, one to one of his slave girls, Roxana by name. Roxana was twenty

years old.  She was up and around the same day, with her hands full, for

she was tending both babes.



Mrs. Percy Driscoll died within the week.  Roxy remained in charge of the

children.  She had her own way, for Mr. Driscoll soon absorbed himself in

his speculations and left her to her own devices.



In that same month of February, Dawson's Landing gained a new citizen.

This was Mr. David Wilson, a young fellow of Scotch parentage. He had

wandered to this remote region from his birthplace in the interior of the

State of New York, to seek his fortune.  He was twenty-five years old,

college bred, and had finished a post-college course in an Eastern law

school a couple of years before.



He was a homely, freckled, sandy-haired young fellow, with an intelligent

blue eye that had frankness and comradeship in it and a covert twinkle of

a pleasant sort.  But for an unfortunate remark of his, he would no doubt

have entered at once upon a successful career at Dawson's Landing. But he

made his fatal remark the first day he spent in the village, and it

"gaged" him.  He had just made the acquaintance of a group of citizens

when an invisible dog began to yelp and snarl and howl and make himself

very comprehensively disagreeable, whereupon young Wilson said, much as

one who is thinking aloud:



"I wish I owned half of that dog."



"Why?" somebody asked.



"Because I would kill my half."



The group searched his face with curiosity, with anxiety even, but found

no light there, no expression that they could read. They fell away from

him as from something uncanny, and went into privacy to discuss him.  One

said:



"'Pears to be a fool."



"'Pears?" said another.  "_Is,_ I reckon you better say."



"Said he wished he owned _half_ of the dog, the idiot," said a third.

"What did he reckon would become of the other half if he killed his half?

Do you reckon he thought it would live?"



"Why, he must have thought it, unless he IS the downrightest fool in the

world; because if he hadn't thought it, he would have wanted to own the

whole dog, knowing that if he killed his half and the other half died, he

would be responsible for that half just the same as if he had killed that

half instead of his own.  Don't it look that way to you, gents?"



"Yes, it does.  If he owned one half of the general dog, it would be so;

if he owned one end of the dog and another person owned the other end, it

would be so, just the same; particularly in the first case, because if

you kill one half of a general dog, there ain't any man that can tell

whose half it was; but if he owned one end of the dog, maybe he could

kill his end of it and--"



"No, he couldn't either; he couldn't and not be responsible if the other

end died, which it would.  In my opinion that man ain't in his right

mind."



"In my opinion he hain't _got_ any mind."



No. 3 said:  "Well, he's a lummox, anyway."



"That's what he is;" said No. 4.  "He's a labrick--just a Simon-pure

labrick, if there was one."



"Yes, sir, he's a dam fool.  That's the way I put him up," said No. 5.

"Anybody can think different that wants to, but those are my sentiments."



"I'm with you, gentlemen," said No. 6.  "Perfect jackass--yes, and it

ain't going too far to say he is a pudd'nhead. If he ain't a pudd'nhead,

I ain't no judge, that's all."



Mr. Wilson stood elected.  The incident was told all over the town, and

gravely discussed by everybody.  Within a week he had lost his first

name;  Pudd'nhead took its place.  In time he came to be liked, and well

liked too; but by that time the nickname had got well stuck on, and it

stayed.  That first day's verdict made him a fool, and he was not able to

get it set aside, or even modified.  The nickname soon ceased to carry

any harsh or unfriendly feeling with it, but it held its place, and was

to continue to hold its place for twenty long years.









CHAPTER 2



Driscoll Spares His Slaves



Adam was but human--this explains it all.  He did not want the apple for

the apple's sake, he wanted it only because it was forbidden. The mistake

was in not forbidding the serpent; then he would have eaten the serpent.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Pudd'nhead Wilson had a trifle of money when he arrived, and he bought a

small house on the extreme western verge of the town. Between it and

Judge Driscoll's house there was only a grassy yard, with a paling fence

dividing the properties in the middle. He hired a small office down in

the town and hung out a tin sign with these words on it:



D A V I D   W I L S O N



ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW



SURVEYING, CONVEYANCING, ETC.



But his deadly remark had ruined his chance--at least in the law. No

clients came.  He took down his sign, after a while, and put it up on his

own house with the law features knocked out of it. It offered his

services now in the humble capacities of land surveyor and expert

accountant.  Now and then he got a job of surveying to do, and now and

then a merchant got him to straighten out his books. With Scotch patience

and pluck he resolved to live down his reputation and work his way into

the legal field yet.  Poor fellow, he could foresee that it was going to

take him such a weary long time to do it.



He had a rich abundance of idle time, but it never hung heavy on his

hands, for he interested himself in every new thing that was born into

the universe of ideas, and studied it, and experimented upon it at his

house. One of his pet fads was palmistry.  To another one he gave no

name, neither would he explain to anybody what its purpose was, but

merely said it was an amusement.  In fact, he had found that his fads

added to his reputation as a pudd'nhead; there, he was growing chary of

being too communicative about them.  The fad without a name was one which

dealt with people's finger marks.  He carried in his coat pocket a

shallow box with grooves in it, and in the grooves strips of glass five

inches long and three inches wide.  Along the lower edge of each strip

was pasted a slip of white paper.  He asked people to pass their hands

through their hair (thus collecting upon them a thin coating of the

natural oil) and then making a thumb-mark on a glass strip, following it

with the mark of the ball of each finger in succession.  Under this row

of faint grease prints he would write a record on the strip of white

paper--thus:



JOHN SMITH, right hand--



and add the day of the month and the year, then take Smith's left hand on

another glass strip, and add name and date and the words "left hand." The

strips were now returned to the grooved box, and took their place among

what Wilson called his "records."



He often studied his records, examining and poring over them with

absorbing interest until far into the night; but what he found there--if

he found anything--he revealed to no one.  Sometimes he copied on paper

the involved and delicate pattern left by the ball of the finger, and

then vastly enlarged it with a pantograph so that he could examine its

web of curving lines with ease and convenience.



One sweltering afternoon--it was the first day of July, 1830--he was at

work over a set of tangled account books in his workroom, which looked

westward over a stretch of vacant lots, when a conversation outside

disturbed him.  It was carried on in yells, which showed that the people

engaged in it were not close together.



"Say, Roxy, how does yo' baby come on?"  This from the distant voice.



"Fust-rate.  How does _you_ come on, Jasper?"  This yell was from close

by.



"Oh, I's middlin'; hain't got noth'n' to complain of, I's gwine to come

a-court'n you bimeby, Roxy."



"_You_ is, you black mud cat!  Yah--yah--yah!  I got somep'n' better to

do den 'sociat'n' wid niggers as black as you is.  Is ole Miss Cooper's

Nancy done give you de mitten?"  Roxy followed this sally with another

discharge of carefree laughter.



"You's jealous, Roxy, dat's what's de matter wid you, you

hussy--yah--yah--yah!  Dat's de time I got you!"



"Oh, yes, _you_ got me, hain't you.  'Clah to goodness if dat conceit o'

yo'n strikes in, Jasper, it gwine to kill you sho'.  If you b'longed to

me, I'd sell you down de river 'fo' you git too fur gone. Fust time I

runs acrost yo' marster, I's gwine to tell him so."



This idle and aimless jabber went on and on, both parties enjoying the

friendly duel and each well satisfied with his own share of the wit

exchanged--for wit they considered it.



Wilson stepped to the window to observe the combatants; he could not work

while their chatter continued.  Over in the vacant lots was Jasper,

young, coal black, and of magnificent build, sitting on a wheelbarrow in

the pelting sun--at work, supposably, whereas he was in fact only

preparing for it by taking an hour's rest before beginning.  In front of

Wilson's porch stood Roxy, with a local handmade baby wagon, in which sat

her two charges--one at each end and facing each other. From Roxy's

manner of speech, a stranger would have expected her to be black, but she

was not.  Only one sixteenth of her was black, and that sixteenth did not

show.  She was of majestic form and stature, her attitudes were imposing

and statuesque, and her gestures and movements distinguished by a noble

and stately grace.  Her complexion was very fair, with the rosy glow of

vigorous health in her cheeks, her face was full of character and

expression, her eyes were brown and liquid, and she had a heavy suit of

fine soft hair which was also brown, but the fact was not apparent

because her head was bound about with a checkered handkerchief and the

hair was concealed under it.  Her face was shapely, intelligent, and

comely--even beautiful.  She had an easy, independent carriage--when she

was among her own caste--and a high and "sassy" way, withal; but of

course she was meek and humble enough where white people were.



To all intents and purposes Roxy was as white as anybody, but the one

sixteenth of her which was black outvoted the other fifteen parts and

made her a Negro.  She was a slave, and salable as such.  Her child was

thirty-one parts white, and he, too, was a slave, and by a fiction of law

and custom a Negro.  He had blue eyes and flaxen curls like his white

comrade, but even the father of the white child was able to tell the

children apart--little as he had commerce with them--by their clothes;

for the white babe wore ruffled soft muslin and a coral necklace, while

the other wore merely a coarse tow-linen shirt which barely reached to

its knees, and no jewelry.



The white child's name was Thomas a Becket Driscoll, the other's name was

Valet de Chambre:  no surname--slaves hadn't the privilege. Roxana had

heard that phrase somewhere, the fine sound of it had pleased her ear,

and as she had supposed it was a name, she loaded it on to her darling.

It soon got shorted to "Chambers," of course.



Wilson knew Roxy by sight, and when the duel of wits begun to play out,

he stepped outside to gather in a record or two.  Jasper went to work

energetically, at once, perceiving that his leisure was observed. Wilson

inspected the children and asked:



"How old are they, Roxy?"



"Bofe de same age, sir--five months.  Bawn de fust o' Feb'uary."



"They're handsome little chaps.  One's just as handsome as the other,

too."



A delighted smile exposed the girl's white teeth, and she said:



"Bless yo' soul, Misto Wilson, it's pow'ful nice o' you to say dat,

'ca'se one of 'em ain't on'y a nigger.  Mighty prime little nigger, _I_

al'ays says, but dat's 'ca'se it's mine, o' course."



"How do you tell them apart, Roxy, when they haven't any clothes on?"



Roxy laughed a laugh proportioned to her size, and said:



"Oh, _I_ kin tell 'em 'part, Misto Wilson, but I bet Marse Percy

couldn't, not to save his life."



Wilson chatted along for awhile, and presently got Roxy's fingerprints

for his collection--right hand and left--on a couple of his glass strips;

then labeled and dated them, and took the "records" of both children, and

labeled and dated them also.



Two months later, on the third of September, he took this trio of finger

marks again.  He liked to have a "series," two or three "takings" at

intervals during the period of childhood, these to be followed at

intervals of several years.



The next day--that is to say, on the fourth of September--something

occurred which profoundly impressed Roxana.  Mr. Driscoll missed another

small sum of money--which is a way of saying that this was not a new

thing, but had happened before.  In truth, it had happened three times

before. Driscoll's patience was exhausted.  He was a fairly humane man

toward slaves and other animals; he was an exceedingly humane man toward

the erring of his own race.  Theft he could not abide, and plainly there

was a thief in his house.  Necessarily the thief must be one of his

Negros. Sharp measures must be taken.  He called his servants before him.

There were three of these, besides Roxy:  a man, a woman, and a boy

twelve years old.  They were not related.  Mr. Driscoll said:



"You have all been warned before.  It has done no good.  This time I will

teach you a lesson.  I will sell the thief.  Which of you is the guilty

one?"



They all shuddered at the threat, for here they had a good home, and a

new one was likely to be a change for the worse.  The denial was general.

None had stolen anything--not money, anyway--a little sugar, or cake, or

honey, or something like that, that "Marse Percy wouldn't mind or miss"

but not money--never a cent of money.  They were eloquent in their

protestations, but Mr. Driscoll was not moved by them. He answered each

in turn with a stern "Name the thief!"



The truth was, all were guilty but Roxana; she suspected that the others

were guilty, but she did not know them to be so.  She was horrified to

think how near she had come to being guilty herself; she had been saved

in the nick of time by a revival in the colored Methodist Church, a

fortnight before, at which time and place she "got religion." The very

next day after that gracious experience, while her change of style was

fresh upon her and she was vain of her purified condition, her master

left a couple dollars unprotected on his desk, and she happened upon that

temptation when she was polishing around with a dustrag. She looked at

the money awhile with a steady rising resentment, then she burst out

with:



"Dad blame dat revival, I wisht it had 'a' be'n put off till tomorrow!"



Then she covered the tempter with a book, and another member of the

kitchen cabinet got it.  She made this sacrifice as a matter of religious

etiquette; as a thing necessary just now, but by no means to be wrested

into a precedent; no, a week or two would limber up her piety, then she

would be rational again, and the next two dollars that got left out in

the cold would find a comforter--and she could name the comforter.



Was she bad?  Was she worse than the general run of her race?  No. They

had an unfair show in the battle of life, and they held it no sin to take

military advantage of the enemy--in a small way; in a small way, but not

in a large one.  They would smouch provisions from the pantry whenever

they got a chance; or a brass thimble, or a cake of wax, or an emery bag,

or a paper of needles, or a silver spoon, or a dollar bill, or small

articles of clothing, or any other property of light value; and so far

were they from considering such reprisals sinful, that they would go to

church and shout and pray the loudest and sincerest with their plunder in

their pockets.  A farm smokehouse had to be kept heavily padlocked, or

even the colored deacon himself could not resist a ham when Providence

showed him in a dream, or otherwise, where such a thing hung lonesome,

and longed for someone to love.  But with a hundred hanging before him,

the deacon would not take two--that is, on the same night. On frosty

nights the humane Negro prowler would warm the end of the plank and put

it up under the cold claws of chickens roosting in a tree; a drowsy hen

would step on to the comfortable board, softly clucking her gratitude,

and the prowler would dump her into his bag, and later into his stomach,

perfectly sure that in taking this trifle from the man who daily robbed

him of an inestimable treasure--his liberty--he was not committing any

sin that God would remember against him in the Last Great Day.



"Name the thief!"



For the fourth time Mr. Driscoll had said it, and always in the same hard

tone.  And now he added these words of awful import:



"I give you one minute."  He took out his watch.  "If at the end of that

time, you have not confessed, I will not only sell all four of you,

BUT--I will sell you DOWN THE RIVER!"



It was equivalent to condemning them to hell!  No Missouri Negro doubted

this.  Roxy reeled in her tracks, and the color vanished out of her face;

the others dropped to their knees as if they had been shot; tears gushed

from their eyes, their supplicating hands went up, and three answers came

in the one instant.



"I done it!"



"I done it!"



"I done it!--have mercy, marster--Lord have mercy on us po' niggers!"



"Very good," said the master, putting up his watch, "I will sell you

_here_ though you don't deserve it.  You ought to be sold down the

river."



The culprits flung themselves prone, in an ecstasy of gratitude, and

kissed his feet, declaring that they would never forget his goodness and

never cease to pray for him as long as they lived. They were sincere, for

like a god he had stretched forth his mighty hand and closed the gates of

hell against them.  He knew, himself, that he had done a noble and

gracious thing, and was privately well pleased with his magnanimity; and

that night he set the incident down in his diary, so that his son might

read it in after years, and be thereby moved to deeds of gentleness and

humanity himself.









CHAPTER 3



Roxy Plays a Shrewd Trick



Whoever has lived long enough to find out what life is, knows how deep a

debt of gratitude we owe to Adam, the first great benefactor of our race.

He brought death into the world.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Percy Driscoll slept well the night he saved his house minions from

going down the river, but no wink of sleep visited Roxy's eyes. A

profound terror had taken possession of her.  Her child could grow up and

be sold down the river!  The thought crazed her with horror. If she dozed

and lost herself for a moment, the next moment she was on her feet flying

to her child's cradle to see if it was still there. Then she would gather

it to her heart and pour out her love upon it in a frenzy of kisses,

moaning, crying, and saying, "Dey sha'n't, oh, dey _sha'nt'!'_--yo' po'

mammy will kill you fust!"



Once, when she was tucking him back in its cradle again, the other child

nestled in its sleep and attracted her attention.  She went and stood

over it a long time communing with herself.



"What has my po' baby done, dat he couldn't have yo' luck? He hain't done

nuth'n.  God was good to you; why warn't he good to him? Dey can't sell

_you_ down de river.  I hates yo' pappy; he hain't got no heart--for

niggers, he hain't, anyways.  I hates him, en I could kill him!"  She

paused awhile, thinking; then she burst into wild sobbings again, and

turned away, saying, "Oh, I got to kill my chile, dey ain't no yuther

way--killin' _him_ wouldn't save de chile fum goin' down de river.  Oh, I

got to do it, yo' po' mammy's got to kill you to save you, honey."  She

gathered her baby to her bosom now, and began to smother it with

caresses.  "Mammy's got to kill you--how _kin_ I do it! But yo' mammy

ain't gwine to desert you--no, no, _dah_, don't cry--she gwine _wid_

you, she gwine to kill herself too.  Come along, honey, come along wid

mammy; we gwine to jump in de river, den troubles o' dis worl' is all

over--dey don't sell po' niggers down the river over _yonder_."



She stared toward the door, crooning to the child and hushing it; midway

she stopped, suddenly.  She had caught sight of her new Sunday gown--a

cheap curtain-calico thing, a conflagration of gaudy colors and fantastic

figures.  She surveyed it wistfully, longingly.



"Hain't ever wore it yet," she said, "en it's just lovely." Then she

nodded her head in response to a pleasant idea, and added, "No, I ain't

gwine to be fished out, wid everybody lookin' at me, in dis mis'able ole

linsey-woolsey."



She put down the child and made the change.  She looked in the glass and

was astonished at her beauty.  She resolved to make her death toilet

perfect. She took off her handkerchief turban and dressed her glossy

wealth of hair "like white folks"; she added some odds and ends of rather

lurid ribbon and a spray of atrocious artificial flowers; finally she

threw over her shoulders a fluffy thing called a "cloud" in that day,

which was of a blazing red complexion.  Then she was ready for the tomb.



She gathered up her baby once more; but when her eye fell upon its

miserably short little gray tow-linen shirt and noted the contrast

between its pauper shabbiness and her own volcanic eruption of infernal

splendors, her mother-heart was touched, and she was ashamed.



"No, dolling mammy ain't gwine to treat you so.  De angels is gwine to

'mire you jist as much as dey does yo' mammy.  Ain't gwine to have 'em

putt'n dey han's up 'fo' dey eyes en sayin' to David and Goliah en dem

yuther prophets, 'Dat chile is dress' to indelicate fo' dis place.'"



By this time she had stripped off the shirt.  Now she clothed the naked

little creature in one of Thomas `a Becket's snowy, long baby gowns, with

its bright blue bows and dainty flummery of ruffles.



"Dah--now you's fixed."  She propped the child in a chair and stood off

to inspect it.  Straightway her eyes begun to widen with astonishment and

admiration, and she clapped her hands and cried out, "Why, it do beat

all!  I _never_ knowed you was so lovely. Marse Tommy ain't a bit

puttier--not a single bit."



She stepped over and glanced at the other infant; she flung a glance

back at her own; then one more at the heir of the house.  Now a strange

light dawned in her eyes, and in a moment she was lost in thought. She

seemed in a trance; when she came out of it, she muttered, "When I 'uz

a-washin' 'em in de tub, yistiddy, he own pappy asked me which of 'em was

his'n."



She began to move around like one in a dream.  She undressed Thomas `a

Becket, stripping him of everything, and put the tow-linen shirt on him.

She put his coral necklace on her own child's neck. Then she placed the

children side by side, and after earnest inspection she muttered:



"Now who would b'lieve clo'es could do de like o' dat?  Dog my cats if it

ain't all _I_ kin do to tell t' other fum which, let alone his pappy."



She put her cub in Tommy's elegant cradle and said:



"You's young Marse _Tom_ fum dis out, en I got to practice and git used

to 'memberin' to call you dat, honey, or I's gwine to make a mistake

sometime en git us bofe into trouble.  Dah--now you lay still en don't

fret no mo', Marse Tom.  Oh, thank de lord in heaven, you's saved, you's

saved!  Dey ain't no man kin ever sell mammy's po' little honey down de

river now!"



She put the heir of the house in her own child's unpainted pine cradle,

and said, contemplating its slumbering form uneasily:



"I's sorry for you, honey; I's sorry, God knows I is--but what _kin_ I

do, what _could_ I do?  Yo' pappy would sell him to somebody, sometime,

en den he'd go down de river, sho', en I couldn't, couldn't, _couldn't_

stan' it."



She flung herself on her bed and began to think and toss, toss and think.

By and by she sat suddenly upright, for a comforting thought had flown

through her worried mind--



"'T ain't no sin--_white_ folks has done it!  It ain't no sin, glory to

goodness it ain't no sin!  _Dey's_ done it--yes, en dey was de biggest

quality in de whole bilin', too--_kings!"_



She began to muse; she was trying to gather out of her memory the dim

particulars of some tale she had heard some time or other. At last she

said--



"Now I's got it; now I 'member.  It was dat ole nigger preacher dat tole

it, de time he come over here fum Illinois en preached in de nigger

church.  He said dey ain't nobody kin save his own self--can't do it by

faith, can't do it by works, can't do it no way at all. Free grace is de

_on'y_ way, en dat don't come fum nobody but jis' de Lord; en _he_ kin

give it to anybody He please, saint or sinner--_he_ don't kyer. He do

jis' as He's a mineter.  He s'lect out anybody dat suit Him, en put

another one in his place, and make de fust one happy forever en leave t'

other one to burn wid Satan.  De preacher said it was jist like dey done

in Englan' one time, long time ago.  De queen she lef' her baby layin'

aroun' one day, en went out callin'; an one 'o de niggers roun'bout de

place dat was 'mos' white, she come in en see de chile layin' aroun', en

tuck en put her own chile's clo's on de queen's chile, en put de queen's

chile's clo'es on her own chile, en den lef' her own chile layin' aroun',

en tuck en toted de queen's chile home to de nigger quarter, en nobody

ever foun' it out, en her chile was de king bimeby, en sole de queen's

chile down de river one time when dey had to settle up de estate.  Dah,

now--de preacher said it his own self, en it ain't no sin, 'ca'se white

folks done it. DEY done it--yes, DEY done it; en not on'y jis' common

white folks nuther, but de biggest quality dey is in de whole bilin'.

_Oh_, I's _so_ glad I 'member 'bout dat!"



She got lighthearted and happy, and went to the cradles, and spent what

was left of the night "practicing."  She would give her own child a light

pat and say humbly, "Lay still, Marse Tom," then give the real Tom a pat

and say with severity, "Lay _still_, Chambers!  Does you want me to take

somep'n _to_ you?"



As she progressed with her practice, she was surprised to see how

steadily and surely the awe which had kept her tongue reverent and her

manner humble toward her young master was transferring itself to her

speech and manner toward the usurper, and how similarly handy she was

becoming in transferring her motherly curtness of speech and

peremptoriness of manner to the unlucky heir of the ancient house of

Driscoll.



She took occasional rests from practicing, and absorbed herself in

calculating her chances.



"Dey'll sell dese niggers today fo' stealin' de money, den dey'll buy

some mo' dat don't now de chillen--so _dat's_ all right.  When I takes de

chillen out to git de air, de minute I's roun' de corner I's gwine to

gaum dey mouths all roun' wid jam, den dey can't _nobody_ notice dey's

changed.  Yes, I gwine ter do dat till I's safe, if it's a year.



"Dey ain't but one man dat I's afeard of, en dat's dat Pudd'nhead Wilson.

Dey calls him a pudd'nhead, en says he's a fool.  My lan, dat man ain't

no mo' fool den I is!  He's de smartes' man in dis town, lessn' it's

Jedge Driscoll or maybe Pem Howard.  Blame dat man, he worries me wid dem

ornery glasses o' his'n; _I_ b'lieve he's a witch. But nemmine, I's gwine

to happen aroun' dah one o' dese days en let on dat I reckon he wants to

print a chillen's fingers ag'in; en if HE don't notice dey's changed, I

bound dey ain't nobody gwine to notice it, en den I's safe, sho'.  But I

reckon I'll tote along a hoss-shoe to keep off de witch work."



The new Negros gave Roxy no trouble, of course.  The master gave her

none, for one of his speculations was in jeopardy, and his mind was so

occupied that he hardly saw the children when he looked at them, and all

Roxy had to do was to get them both into a gale of laughter when he came

about;  then their faces were mainly cavities exposing gums, and he was

gone again before the spasm passed and the little creatures resumed a

human aspect.



Within a few days the fate of the speculation became so dubious that Mr.

Percy went away with his brother, the judge, to see what could be done

with it.  It was a land speculation as usual, and it had gotten

complicated with a lawsuit.  The men were gone seven weeks.  Before they

got back, Roxy had paid her visit to Wilson, and was satisfied. Wilson

took the fingerprints, labeled them with the names and with the date

--October the first--put them carefully away, and continued his chat with

Roxy, who seemed very anxious that he should admire the great advance in

flesh and beauty which the babes had made since he took their

fingerprints a month before.  He complimented their improvement to her

contentment; and as they were without any disguise of jam or other stain,

she trembled all the while and was miserably frightened lest at any

moment he--



But he didn't.  He discovered nothing; and she went home jubilant, and

dropped all concern about the matter permanently out of her mind.









CHAPTER 4



The Ways of the Changelings



Adam and Eve had many advantages, but the principal one was, that they

escaped teething.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



There is this trouble about special providences--namely, there is so

often a doubt as to which party was intended to be the beneficiary. In

the case of the children, the bears, and the prophet, the bears got more

real satisfaction out of the episode than the prophet did, because they

got the children.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar







This history must henceforth accommodate itself to the change which

Roxana has consummated, and call the real heir "Chambers" and the

usurping little slave, "Thomas `a Becket"--shortening this latter name to

"Tom," for daily use, as the people about him did.



"Tom" was a bad baby, from the very beginning of his usurpation. He would

cry for nothing; he would burst into storms of devilish temper without

notice, and let go scream after scream and squall after squall, then

climax the thing with "holding his breath"--that frightful specialty of

the teething nursling, in the throes of which the creature exhausts its

lungs, then is convulsed with noiseless squirmings and twistings and

kickings in the effort to get its breath, while the lips turn blue and

the mouth stands wide and rigid, offering for inspection one wee tooth

set in the lower rim of a hoop of red gums; and when the appalling

stillness has endured until one is sure the lost breath will never

return, a nurse comes flying, and dashes water in the child's face,

and--presto! the lungs fill, and instantly discharge a shriek, or a yell,

or a howl which bursts the listening ear and surprises the owner of it

into saying words which would not go well with a halo if he had one.  The

baby Tom would claw anybody who came within reach of his nails, and pound

anybody he could reach with his rattle.  He would scream for water until

he got it, and then throw cup and all on the floor and scream for more.

He was indulged in all his caprices, howsoever troublesome and

exasperating they might be; he was allowed to eat anything he wanted,

particularly things that would give him the stomach-ache.



When he got to be old enough to begin to toddle about and say broken

words and get an idea of what his hands were for, he was a more

consummate pest than ever.  Roxy got no rest while he was awake. He would

call for anything and everything he saw, simply saying, "Awnt it!" (want

it), which was a command.  When it was brought, he said in a frenzy, and

motioning it away with his hands, "Don't awnt it! don't awnt it!" and the

moment it was gone he set up frantic yells of "Awnt it! awnt it!" and

Roxy had to give wings to her heels to get that thing back to him again

before he could get time to carry out his intention of going into

convulsions about it.



What he preferred above all other things was the tongs. This was because

his "father" had forbidden him to have them lest he break windows and

furniture with them.  The moment Roxy's back was turned he would toddle

to the presence of the tongs and say, "Like it!" and cock his eye to one

side or see if Roxy was observed; then, "Awnt it!" and cock his eye

again; then, "Hab it!" with another furtive glace; and finally, "Take

it!"--and the prize was his. The next moment the heavy implement was

raised aloft; the next, there was a crash and a squall, and the cat was

off on three legs to meet an engagement; Roxy would arrive just as the

lamp or a window went to irremediable smash.



Tom got all the petting, Chambers got none.  Tom got all the delicacies,

Chambers got mush and milk, and clabber without sugar.  In consequence

Tom was a sickly child and Chambers wasn't.  Tom was "fractious," as Roxy

called it, and overbearing; Chambers was meek and docile.



With all her splendid common sense and practical everyday ability, Roxy

was a doting fool of a mother.  She was this toward her child--and she

was also more than this:  by the fiction created by herself, he was

become her master; the necessity of recognizing this relation outwardly

and of perfecting herself in the forms required to express the

recognition, had moved her to such diligence and faithfulness in

practicing these forms that this exercise soon concreted itself into

habit; it became automatic and unconscious; then a natural result

followed: deceptions intended solely for others gradually grew

practically into self-deceptions as well; the mock reverence became real

reverence, the mock homage real homage; the little counterfeit rift of

separation between imitation-slave and imitation-master widened and

widened, and became an abyss, and a very real one--and on one side of it

stood Roxy, the dupe of her own deceptions, and on the other stood her

child, no longer a usurper to her, but her accepted and recognized

master.  He was her darling, her master, and her deity all in one, and in

her worship of him she forgot who she was and what he had been.



In babyhood Tom cuffed and banged and scratched Chambers unrebuked, and

Chambers early learned that between meekly bearing it and resenting it,

the advantage all lay with the former policy. The few times that his

persecutions had moved him beyond control and made him fight back had

cost him very dear at headquarters; not at the hands of Roxy, for if she

ever went beyond scolding him sharply for "forgett'n' who his young

marster was," she at least never extended her punishment beyond a box on

the ear. No, Percy Driscoll was the person.  He told Chambers that under

no provocation whatever was he privileged to lift his hand against his

little master.  Chambers overstepped the line three times, and got three

such convincing canings from the man who was his father and didn't know

it, that he took Tom's cruelties in all humility after that, and made no

more experiments.



Outside the house the two boys were together all through their boyhood.

Chambers was strong beyond his years, and a good fighter; strong because

he was coarsely fed and hard worked about the house, and a good fighter

because Tom furnished him plenty of practice--on white boys whom he

hated and was afraid of.  Chambers was his constant bodyguard, to and

from school; he was present on the playground at recess to protect his

charge.  He fought himself into such a formidable reputation, by and by,

that Tom could have changed clothes with him, and "ridden in peace," like

Sir Kay in Launcelot's armor.



He was good at games of skill, too.  Tom staked him with marbles to play

"keeps" with, and then took all the winnings away from him. In the winter

season Chambers was on hand, in Tom's worn-out clothes, with "holy" red

mittens, and "holy" shoes, and pants "holy" at the knees and seat, to

drag a sled up the hill for Tom, warmly clad, to ride down on; but he

never got a ride himself.  He built snowmen and snow fortifications under

Tom's directions.  He was Tom's patient target when Tom wanted to do some

snowballing, but the target couldn't fire back.  Chambers carried Tom's

skates to the river and strapped them on him, then trotted around after

him on the ice, so as to be on hand when he wanted; but he wasn't ever

asked to try the skates himself.



In summer the pet pastime of the boys of Dawson's Landing was to steal

apples, peaches, and melons from the farmer's fruit wagons--mainly on

account of the risk they ran of getting their heads laid open with the

butt of the farmer's whip.  Tom was a distinguished adept at these

thefts--by proxy.  Chambers did his stealing, and got the peach stones,

apple cores, and melon rinds for his share.



Tom always made Chambers go in swimming with him, and stay by him as a

protection.  When Tom had had enough, he would slip out and tie knots in

Chamber's shirt, dip the knots in the water and make them hard to undo,

then dress himself and sit by and laugh while the naked shiverer tugged

at the stubborn knots with his teeth.



Tom did his humble comrade these various ill turns partly out of native

viciousness, and partly because he hated him for his superiorities of

physique and pluck, and for his manifold cleverness. Tom couldn't dive,

for it gave him splitting headaches. Chambers could dive without

inconvenience, and was fond of doing it. He excited so much admiration,

one day, among a crowd of white boys, by throwing back somersaults from

the stern of a canoe, that it wearied Tom's spirit, and at last he shoved

the canoe underneath Chambers while he was in the air--so he came down on

his head in the canoe bottom; and while he lay unconscious, several of

Tom's ancient adversaries saw that their long-desired opportunity was

come, and they gave the false heir such a drubbing that with Chamber's

best help he was hardly able to drag himself home afterward.



When the boys was fifteen and upward, Tom was "showing off" in the river

one day, when he was taken with a cramp, and shouted for help. It was a

common trick with the boys--particularly if a stranger was present--to

pretend a cramp and howl for help; then when the stranger came tearing

hand over hand to the rescue, the howler would go on struggling and

howling till he was close at hand, then replace the howl with a sarcastic

smile and swim blandly away, while the town boys assailed the dupe with a

volley of jeers and laughter. Tom had never tried this joke as yet, but

was supposed to be trying it now, so the boys held warily back; but

Chambers believed his master was in earnest; therefore, he swam out, and

arrived in time, unfortunately, and saved his life.



This was the last feather.  Tom had managed to endure everything else,

but to have to remain publicly and permanently under such an obligation

as this to a nigger, and to this nigger of all niggers--this was too

much. He heaped insults upon Chambers for "pretending" to think he was in

earnest in calling for help, and said that anybody but a blockheaded

nigger would have known he was funning and left him alone.



Tom's enemies were in strong force here, so they came out with their

opinions quite freely.  The laughed at him, and called him coward, liar,

sneak, and other sorts of pet names, and told him they meant to call

Chambers by a new name after this, and make it common in the town--"Tom

Driscoll's nigger pappy,"--to signify that he had had a second birth into

this life, and that Chambers was the author of his new being.  Tom grew

frantic under these taunts, and shouted:



"Knock their heads off, Chambers!  Knock their heads off! What do you

stand there with your hands in your pockets for?"



Chambers expostulated, and said, "But, Marse Tom, dey's too many of

'em--dey's--"



"Do you hear me?"



"Please, Marse Tom, don't make me!  Dey's so many of 'em dat--"



Tom sprang at him and drove his pocketknife into him two or three times

before the boys could snatch him away and give the wounded lad a chance

to escape.  He was considerably hurt, but not seriously. If the blade had

been a little longer, his career would have ended there.



Tom had long ago taught Roxy "her place."  It had been many a day now

since she had ventured a caress or a fondling epithet in his quarter.

Such things, from a "nigger," were repulsive to him, and she had been

warned to keep her distance and remember who she was.  She saw her

darling gradually cease from being her son, she saw THAT detail perish

utterly; all that was left was master--master, pure and simple, and it

was not a gentle mastership, either.  She saw herself sink from the

sublime height of motherhood to the somber depths of unmodified slavery,

the abyss of separation between her and her boy was complete. She was

merely his chattel now, his convenience, his dog, his cringing and

helpless slave, the humble and unresisting victim of his capricious

temper and vicious nature.



Sometimes she could not go to sleep, even when worn out with fatigue,

because her rage boiled so high over the day's experiences with her boy.

She would mumble and mutter to herself:



"He struck me en I warn't no way to blame--struck me in de face, right

before folks.  En he's al'ays callin' me nigger wench, en hussy, en all

dem mean names, when I's doin' de very bes' I kin. Oh, Lord, I done so

much for him--I lif' him away up to what he is--en dis is what I git for

it."



Sometimes when some outrage of peculiar offensiveness stung her to the

heart, she would plan schemes of vengeance and revel in the fancied

spectacle of his exposure to the world as an imposter and a slave; but in

the midst of these joys fear would strike her; she had made him too

strong; she could prove nothing, and--heavens, she might get sold down

the river for her pains!  So her schemes always went for nothing, and she

laid them aside in impotent rage against the fates, and against herself

for playing the fool on that fatal September day in not providing herself

with a witness for use in the day when such a thing might be needed for

the appeasing of her vengeance-hungry heart.



And yet the moment Tom happened to be good to her, and kind--and this

occurred every now and then--all her sore places were healed, and she was

happy; happy and proud, for this was her son, her nigger son, lording it

among the whites and securely avenging their crimes against her race.



There were two grand funerals in Dawson's Landing that fall--the fall of

1845.  One was that of Colonel Cecil Burleigh Essex, the other that of

Percy Driscoll.



On his deathbed Driscoll set Roxy free and delivered his idolized

ostensible son solemnly into the keeping of his brother, the judge, and

his wife.  Those childless people were glad to get him. Childless people

are not difficult to please.



Judge Driscoll had gone privately to his brother, a month before, and

bought Chambers.  He had heard that Tom had been trying to get his father

to sell the boy down the river, and he wanted to prevent the scandal--for

public sentiment did not approve of that way of treating family servants

for light cause or for no cause.



Percy Driscoll had worn himself out in trying to save his great

speculative landed estate, and had died without succeeding. He was hardly

in his grave before the boom collapsed and left his envied young devil of

an heir a pauper.  But that was nothing; his uncle told him he should be

his heir and have all his fortune when he died; so Tom was comforted.



Roxy had no home now; so she resolved to go around and say good-by to her

friends and then clear out and see the world--that is to say, she would

go chambermaiding on a steamboat, the darling ambition of her race and

sex.



Her last call was on the black giant, Jasper.  She found him chopping

Pudd'nhead Wilson's winter provision of wood.



Wilson was chatting with him when Roxy arrived.  He asked her how she

could bear to go off chambermaiding and leave her boys; and chaffingly

offered to copy off a series of their fingerprints, reaching up to their

twelfth year, for her to remember them by; but she sobered in a moment,

wondering if he suspected anything; then she said she believed she didn't

want them.  Wilson said to himself, "The drop of black blood in her is

superstitious; she thinks there's some devilry, some witch business about

my glass mystery somewhere; she used to come here with an old horseshoe

in her hand; it could have been an accident, but I doubt it."









CHAPTER 5



The Twins Thrill Dawson's Landing



Training is everything.  The peach was once a bitter almond; cauliflower

is nothing but cabbage with a college education.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Remark of Dr. Baldwin's, concerning upstarts:  We don't care to eat

toadstools that think they are truffles.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Mrs. York Driscoll enjoyed two years of bliss with that prize,

Tom--bliss that was troubled a little at times, it is true, but bliss

nevertheless; then she died, and her husband and his childless sister,

Mrs. Pratt, continued this bliss-business at the old stand.  Tom was

petted and indulged and spoiled to his entire content--or nearly that.

This went on till he was nineteen, then he was sent to Yale.  He went

handsomely equipped with "conditions," but otherwise he was not an object

of distinction there. He remained at Yale two years, and then threw up

the struggle. He came home with his manners a good deal improved; he had

lost his surliness and brusqueness, and was rather pleasantly soft and

smooth, now; he was furtively, and sometimes openly, ironical of speech,

and given to gently touching people on the raw, but he did it with a

good-natured semiconscious air that carried it off safely, and kept him

from getting into trouble.  He was as indolent as ever and showed no very

strenuous desire to hunt up an occupation.  People argued from this that

he preferred to be supported by his uncle until his uncle's shoes should

become vacant.  He brought back one or two new habits with him, one of

which he rather openly practiced--tippling--but concealed another, which

was gambling.  It would not do to gamble where his uncle could hear of

it; he knew that quite well.



Tom's Eastern polish was not popular among the young people. They could

have endured it, perhaps, if Tom had stopped there; but he wore gloves,

and that they couldn't stand, and wouldn't; so he was mainly without

society.  He brought home with him a suit of clothes of such exquisite

style and cut in fashion--Eastern fashion, city fashion--that it filled

everybody with anguish and was regarded as a peculiarly wanton affront.

He enjoyed the feeling which he was exciting, and paraded the town serene

and happy all day; but the young fellows set a tailor to work that night,

and when Tom started out on his parade next morning, he found the old

deformed Negro bell ringer straddling along in his wake tricked out in a

flamboyant curtain-calico exaggeration of his finery, and imitating his

fancy Eastern graces as well as he could.



Tom surrendered, and after that clothed himself in the local fashion. But

the dull country town was tiresome to him, since his acquaintanceship

with livelier regions, and it grew daily more and more so.  He began to

make little trips to St. Louis for refreshment. There he found

companionship to suit him, and pleasures to his taste, along with more

freedom, in some particulars, than he could have at home. So, during the

next two years, his visits to the city grew in frequency and his

tarryings there grew steadily longer in duration.



He was getting into deep waters.  He was taking chances, privately, which

might get him into trouble some day--in fact, _did_.



Judge Driscoll had retired from the bench and from all business

activities in 1850, and had now been comfortably idle three years. He was

president of the Freethinkers' Society, and Pudd'nhead Wilson was the

other member.  The society's weekly discussions were now the old lawyer's

main interest in life.  Pudd'nhead was still toiling in obscurity at the

bottom of the ladder, under the blight of that unlucky remark which he

had let fall twenty-three years before about the dog.



Judge Driscoll was his friend, and claimed that he had a mind above the

average, but that was regarded as one of the judge's whims, and it failed

to modify the public opinion.  Or rather, that was one of the reason why

it failed, but there was another and better one. If the judge had stopped

with bare assertion, it would have had a good deal of effect; but he made

the mistake of trying to prove his position. For some years Wilson had

been privately at work on a whimsical almanac, for his amusement--a

calendar, with a little dab of ostensible philosophy, usually in ironical

form, appended to each date; and the judge thought that these quips and

fancies of Wilson's were neatly turned and cute; so he carried a handful

of them around one day, and read them to some of the chief citizens.  But

irony was not for those people; their mental vision was not focused for

it.  They read those playful trifles in the solidest terms, and decided

without hesitancy that if there had ever been any doubt that Dave Wilson

was a pudd'nhead--which there hadn't--this revelation removed that doubt

for good and all. That is just the way in this world; an enemy can partly

ruin a man, but it takes a good-natured injudicious friend to complete

the thing and make it perfect.  After this the judge felt tenderer than

ever toward Wilson, and surer than ever that his calendar had merit.



Judge Driscoll could be a freethinker and still hold his place in society

because he was the person of most consequence to the community, and

therefore could venture to go his own way and follow out his own notions.

The other member of his pet organization was allowed the like liberty

because he was a cipher in the estimation of the public, and nobody

attached any importance to what he thought or did. He was liked, he was

welcome enough all around, but he simply didn't count for anything.



The Widow Cooper--affectionately called "Aunt Patsy" by everybody--lived

in a snug and comely cottage with her daughter Rowena, who was nineteen,

romantic, amiable, and very pretty, but otherwise of no consequence.

Rowena had a couple of young brothers--also of no consequence.



The widow had a large spare room, which she let to a lodger, with board,

when she could find one, but this room had been empty for a year now, to

her sorrow.  Her income was only sufficient for the family support, and

she needed the lodging money for trifling luxuries.  But now, at last, on

a flaming June day, she found herself happy; her tedious wait was ended;

her year-worn advertisement had been answered; and not by a village

applicant, no, no!--this letter was from away off yonder in the dim great

world to the North; it was from St. Louis.  She sat on her porch gazing

out with unseeing eyes upon the shining reaches of the mighty

Mississippi, her thoughts steeped in her good fortune.  Indeed it was

specially good fortune, for she was to have two lodgers instead of one.



She had read the letter to the family, and Rowena had danced away to see

to the cleaning and airing of the room by the slave woman, Nancy, and the

boys had rushed abroad in the town to spread the great news, for it was a

matter of public interest, and the public would wonder and not be pleased

if not informed.  Presently Rowena returned, all ablush with joyous

excitement, and begged for a rereading of the letter. It was framed thus:



HONORED MADAM:  My brother and I have seen your advertisement, by chance,

and beg leave to take the room you offer.  We are twenty-four years of

age and twins.  We are Italians by birth, but have lived long in the

various countries of Europe, and several years in the United States. Our

names are Luigi and Angelo Capello.  You desire but one guest; but, dear

madam, if you will allow us to pay for two, we will not incommode you.

We shall be down Thursday.



"Italians!  How romantic!  Just think, Ma--there's never been one in this

town, and everybody will be dying to see them, and they're all OURS!

Think of that!"



"Yes, I reckon they'll make a grand stir."



"Oh, indeed they will.  The whole town will be on its head!

Think--they've been in Europe and everywhere!  There's never been a

traveler in this town before, Ma, I shouldn't wonder if they've seen

kings!"



"Well, a body can't tell, but they'll make stir enough, without that."



"Yes, that's of course.  Luigi--Angelo.  They're lovely names; and so

grand and foreign--not like Jones and Robinson and such. Thursday they

are coming, and this is only Tuesday; it's a cruel long time to wait.

Here comes Judge Driscoll in at the gate. He's heard about it.  I'll go

and open the door."



The judge was full of congratulations and curiosity.  The letter was read

and discussed.  Soon Justice Robinson arrived with more congratulations,

and there was a new reading and a new discussion. This was the beginning.

Neighbor after neighbor, of both sexes, followed, and the procession

drifted in and out all day and evening and all Wednesday and Thursday.

The letter was read and reread until it was nearly worn out; everybody

admired its courtly and gracious tone, and smooth and practiced style,

everybody was sympathetic and excited, and the Coopers were steeped in

happiness all the while.



The boats were very uncertain in low water in these primitive times. This

time the Thursday boat had not arrived at ten at night--so the people

had waited at the landing all day for nothing; they were driven to their

homes by a heavy storm without having had a view of the illustrious

foreigners.



Eleven o'clock came; and the Cooper house was the only one in the town

that still had lights burning.  The rain and thunder were booming yet,

and the anxious family were still waiting, still hoping. At last there

was a knock at the door, and the family jumped to open it. Two Negro men

entered, each carrying a trunk, and proceeded upstairs toward the guest

room.  Then entered the twins--the handsomest, the best dressed, the most

distinguished-looking pair of young fellows the West had ever seen.  One

was a little fairer than the other, but otherwise they were exact

duplicates.









CHAPTER 6



Swimming in Glory



Let us endeavor so to live that when we come to die even the undertaker

will be sorry.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Habit is habit, and not to be flung out of the window by any man, but

coaxed downstairs a step at a time.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



At breakfast in the morning, the twins' charm of manner and easy and

polished bearing made speedy conquest of the family's good graces. All

constraint and formality quickly disappeared, and the friendliest feeling

succeeded.  Aunt Patsy called them by their Christian names almost from

the beginning.  She was full of the keenest curiosity about them, and

showed it; they responded by talking about themselves, which pleased her

greatly.  It presently appeared that in their early youth they had known

poverty and hardship.  As the talk wandered along, the old lady watched

for the right place to drop in a question or two concerning that matter,

and when she found it, she said to the blond twin, who was now doing the

biographies in his turn while the brunette one rested:



"If it ain't asking what I ought not to ask, Mr. Angelo, how did you come

to be so friendless and in such trouble when you were little? Do you mind

telling?  But don't, if you do."



"Oh, we don't mind it at all, madam; in our case it was merely

misfortune, and nobody's fault.  Our parents were well to do, there in

Italy, and we were their only child.  We were of the old Florentine

nobility"--Rowena's heart gave a great bound, her nostrils expanded, and

a fine light played in her eyes--"and when the war broke out, my father

was on the losing side and had to fly for his life. His estates were

confiscated, his personal property seized, and there we were, in Germany,

strangers, friendless, and in fact paupers. My brother and I were ten

years old, and well educated for that age, very studious, very fond of

our books, and well grounded in the German, French, Spanish, and English

languages.  Also, we were marvelous musical prodigies--if you will allow

me to say it, it being only the truth.



"Our father survived his misfortunes only a month, our mother soon

followed him, and we were alone in the world.  Our parents could have

made themselves comfortable by exhibiting us as a show, and they had many

and large offers; but the thought revolted their pride, and they said

they would starve and die first.  But what they wouldn't consent to do,

we had to do without the formality of consent. We were seized for the

debts occasioned by their illness and their funerals, and placed among

the attractions of a cheap museum in Berlin to earn the liquidation

money.  It took us two years to get out of that slavery. We traveled all

about Germany, receiving no wages, and not even our keep. We had to be

exhibited for nothing, and beg our bread.



"Well, madam, the rest is not of much consequence.  When we escaped from

that slavery at twelve years of age, we were in some respects men.

Experience had taught us some valuable things; among others, how to take

care of ourselves, how to avoid and defeat sharks and sharpers, and how

to conduct our own business for our own profit and without other people's

help.  We traveled everywhere--years and years--picking up smatterings

of strange tongues, familiarizing ourselves with strange sights and

strange customs, accumulating an education of a wide and varied and

curious sort.  It was a pleasant life. We went to Venice--to London,

Paris, Russia, India, China, Japan--"



At this point Nancy, the slave woman, thrust her head in at the door and

exclaimed:



"Ole Missus, de house is plum' jam full o' people, en dey's jes

a-spi'lin' to see de gen'lemen!"  She indicated the twins with a nod of

her head, and tucked it back out of sight again.



It was a proud occasion for the widow, and she promised herself high

satisfaction in showing off her fine foreign birds before her neighbors

and friends--simple folk who had hardly ever seen a foreigner of any

kind, and never one of any distinction or style. Yet her feeling was

moderate indeed when contrasted with Rowena's. Rowena was in the clouds,

she walked on air; this was to be the greatest day, the most romantic

episode in the colorless history of that dull country town.  She was to

be familiarly near the source of its glory and feel the full flood of it

pour over her and about her; the other girls could only gaze and envy,

not partake.



The widow was ready, Rowena was ready, so also were the foreigners.



The party moved along the hall, the twins in advance, and entered the

open parlor door, whence issued a low hum of conversation. The twins took

a position near the door, the widow stood at Luigi's side, Rowena stood

beside Angelo, and the march-past and the introductions began. The widow

was all smiles and contentment.  She received the procession and passed

it on to Rowena.



"Good mornin', Sister Cooper"--handshake.



"Good morning, Brother Higgins--Count Luigi Capello, Mr. Higgins"

--handshake, followed by a devouring stare and "I'm glad to see ye,"

on the part of Higgins, and a courteous inclination of the head and a

pleasant "Most happy!" on the part of Count Luigi.



"Good mornin', Roweny"--handshake.



"Good morning, Mr. Higgins--present you to Count Angelo Capello."

Handshake, admiring stare, "Glad to see ye"--courteous nod, smily "Most

happy!" and Higgins passes on.



None of these visitors was at ease, but, being honest people, they didn't

pretend to be.  None of them had ever seen a person bearing a title of

nobility before, and none had been expecting to see one now, consequently

the title came upon them as a kind of pile-driving surprise and caught

them unprepared.  A few tried to rise to the emergency, and got out an

awkward "My lord," or "Your lordship," or something of that sort, but the

great majority were overwhelmed by the unaccustomed word and its dim and

awful associations with gilded courts and stately ceremony and anointed

kingship, so they only fumbled through the handshake and passed on,

speechless.  Now and then, as happens at all receptions everywhere, a

more than ordinary friendly soul blocked the procession and kept it

waiting while he inquired how the brothers liked the village, and how

long they were going to stay, and if their family was well, and dragged

in the weather, and hoped it would get cooler soon, and all that sort of

thing, so as to be able to say, when he got home, "I had quite a long

talk with them"; but nobody did or said anything of a regrettable kind,

and so the great affair went through to the end in a creditable and

satisfactory fashion.



General conversation followed, and the twins drifted about from group to

group, talking easily and fluently and winning approval, compelling

admiration and achieving favor from all. The widow followed their

conquering march with a proud eye, and every now and then Rowena said to

herself with deep satisfaction, "And to think they are ours--all ours!"



There were no idle moments for mother or daughter.  Eager inquiries

concerning the twins were pouring into their enchanted ears all the time;

each was the constant center of a group of breathless listeners; each

recognized that she knew now for the first time the real meaning of that

great word Glory, and perceived the stupendous value of it, and

understood why men in all ages had been willing to throw away meaner

happiness, treasure, life itself, to get a taste of its sublime and

supreme joy.  Napoleon and all his kind stood accounted for--and

justified.



When Rowena had at last done all her duty by the people in the parlor,

she went upstairs to satisfy the longings of an overflow meeting there,

for the parlor was not big enough to hold all the comers. Again she was

besieged by eager questioners, and again she swam in sunset seas of

glory.  When the forenoon was nearly gone, she recognized with a pang

that this most splendid episode of her life was almost over, that nothing

could prolong it, that nothing quite its equal could ever fall to her

fortune again.  But never mind, it was sufficient unto itself, the grand

occasion had moved on an ascending scale from the start, and was a noble

and memorable success.  If the twins could but do some crowning act now

to climax it, something usual, something startling, something to

concentrate upon themselves the company's loftiest admiration, something

in the nature of an electric surprise--



Here a prodigious slam-banging broke out below, and everybody rushed down

to see.  It was the twins, knocking out a classic four-handed piece on

the piano in great style.  Rowena was satisfied--satisfied down to the

bottom of her heart.



The young strangers were kept long at the piano.  The villagers were

astonished and enchanted with the magnificence of their performance, and

could not bear to have them stop.  All the music that they had ever heard

before seemed spiritless prentice-work and barren of grace and charm when

compared with these intoxicating floods of melodious sound. They realized

that for once in their lives they were hearing masters.









CHAPTER 7



The Unknown Nymph



One of the most striking differences between a cat and a lie is that a

cat has only nine lives.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



The company broke up reluctantly, and drifted toward their several

homes, chatting with vivacity and all agreeing that it would be many a

long day before Dawson's Landing would see the equal of this one again.

The twins had accepted several invitations while the reception was in

progress, and had also volunteered to play some duets at an amateur

entertainment for the benefit of a local charity. Society was eager to

receive them to its bosom.  Judge Driscoll had the good fortune to secure

them for an immediate drive, and to be the first to display them in

public.  They entered his buggy with him and were paraded down the main

street, everybody flocking to the windows and sidewalks to see.



The judge showed the strangers the new graveyard, and the jail, and where

the richest man lived, and the Freemasons' hall, and the Methodist

church, and the Presbyterian church, and where the Baptist church was

going to be when they got some money to build it with, and showed them

the town hall and the slaughterhouse, and got out of the independent fire

company in uniform and had them put out an imaginary fire; then he let

them inspect the muskets of the militia company, and poured out an

exhaustless stream of enthusiasm over all these splendors, and seemed

very well satisfied with the responses he got, for the twins admired his

admiration, and paid him back the best they could, though they could have

done better if some fifteen or sixteen hundred thousand previous

experiences of this sort in various countries had not already rubbed off

a considerable part of the novelty in it.



The judge laid himself out hospitality to make them have a good time, and

if there was a defect anywhere, it was not his fault. He told them a good

many humorous anecdotes, and always forgot the nub, but they were always

able to furnish it, for these yarns were of a pretty early vintage, and

they had had many a rejuvenating pull at them before.  And he told them

all about his several dignities, and how he had held this and that and

the other place of honor or profit, and had once been to the legislature,

and was now president of the Society of Freethinkers.  He said the

society had been in existence four years, and already had two members,

and was firmly established. He would call for the brothers in the

evening, if they would like to attend a meeting of it.



Accordingly he called for them, and on the way he told them all about

Pudd'nhead Wilson, in order that they might get a favorable impression of

him in advance and be prepared to like him.  This scheme succeeded--the

favorable impression was achieved.  Later it was confirmed and solidified

when Wilson proposed that out of courtesy to the strangers the usual

topics be put aside and the hour be devoted to conversation upon ordinary

subjects and the cultivation of friendly relations and good-fellowship--a

proposition which was put to vote and carried.



The hour passed quickly away in lively talk, and when it was ended, the

lonesome and neglected Wilson was richer by two friends than he had been

when it began.  He invited the twins to look in at his lodgings

presently, after disposing of an intervening engagement, and they

accepted with pleasure.



Toward the middle of the evening, they found themselves on the road to

his house.  Pudd'nhead was at home waiting for them and putting in his

time puzzling over a thing which had come under his notice that morning.

The matter was this:  He happened to be up very early--at dawn, in fact;

and he crossed the hall, which divided his cottage through the center,

and entered a room to get something there. The window of the room had no

curtains, for that side of the house had long been unoccupied, and

through this window he caught sight of something which surprised and

interested him.  It was a young woman--a young woman where properly no

young woman belonged; for she was in Judge Driscoll's house, and in the

bedroom over the judge's private study or sitting room.  This was young

Tom Driscoll's bedroom. He and the judge, the judge's widowed sister Mrs.

Pratt, and three Negro servants were the only people who belonged in the

house.  Who, then, might this young lady be?  The two houses were

separated by an ordinary yard, with a low fence running back through its

middle from the street in front to the lane in the rear.  The distance

was not great, and Wilson was able to see the girl very well, the window

shades of the room she was in being up, and the window also. The girl had

on a neat and trim summer dress, patterned in broad stripes of pink and

white, and her bonnet was equipped with a pink veil. She was practicing

steps, gaits and attitudes, apparently; she was doing the thing

gracefully, and was very much absorbed in her work. Who could she be, and

how came she to be in young Tom Driscoll's room?



Wilson had quickly chosen a position from which he could watch the girl

without running much risk of being seen by her, and he remained there

hoping she would raise her veil and betray her face.  But she

disappointed him.  After a matter of twenty minutes she disappeared and

although he stayed at his post half an hour longer, she came no more.



Toward noon he dropped in at the judge's and talked with Mrs. Pratt about

the great event of the day, the levee of the distinguished foreigners at

Aunt Patsy Cooper's.  He asked after her nephew Tom, and she said he was

on his way home and that she was expecting him to arrive a little before

night, and added that she and the judge were gratified to gather from his

letters that he was conducting himself very nicely and creditably--at

which Wilson winked to himself privately. Wilson did not ask if there was

a newcomer in the house, but he asked questions that would have brought

light-throwing answers as to that matter if Mrs. Pratt had had any light

to throw; so he went away satisfied that he knew of things that were

going on in her house of which she herself was not aware.



He was now awaiting for the twins, and still puzzling over the problem of

who that girl might be, and how she happened to be in that young fellow's

room at daybreak in the morning.









CHAPTER 8



Marse Tom Tramples His Chance



The holy passion of Friendship is of so sweet and steady and loyal and

enduring a nature that it will last through a whole lifetime, if not

asked to lend money.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Consider well the proportions of things.  It is better to be a young June

bug than an old bird of paradise.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



It is necessary now to hunt up Roxy.



At the time she was set free and went away chambermaiding, she was

thirty-five.  She got a berth as second chambermaid on a Cincinnati boat

in the New Orleans trade, the _Grand Mogul_. A couple of trips made her

wonted and easygoing at the work, and infatuated her with the stir and

adventure and independence of steamboat life.  Then she was promoted and

become head chambermaid. She was a favorite with the officers, and

exceedingly proud of their joking and friendly way with her.



During eight years she served three parts of the year on that boat, and

the winters on a Vicksburg packet.  But now for two months, she had had

rheumatism in her arms, and was obliged to let the washtub alone.  So she

resigned.  But she was well fixed--rich, as she would have described it;

for she had lived a steady life, and had banked four dollars every month

in New Orleans as a provision for her old age.  She said in the start

that she had "put shoes on one bar'footed nigger to tromple on her with,"

and that one mistake like that was enough; she would be independent of

the human race thenceforth forevermore if hard work and economy could

accomplish it. When the boat touched the levee at New Orleans she bade

good-by to her comrades on the _Grand Mogul_ and moved her kit ashore.



But she was back in a hour.  The bank had gone to smash and carried her

four hundred dollars with it.  She was a pauper and homeless. Also

disabled bodily, at least for the present.  The officers were full of

sympathy for her in her trouble, and made up a little purse for her.  She

resolved to go to her birthplace; she had friends there among the Negros,

and the unfortunate always help the unfortunate, she was well aware of

that; those lowly comrades of her youth would not let her starve.



She took the little local packet at Cairo, and now she was on the

homestretch.  Time had worn away her bitterness against her son, and she

was able to think of him with serenity.  She put the vile side of him out

of her mind, and dwelt only on recollections of his occasional acts of

kindness to her.  She gilded and otherwise decorated these, and made them

very pleasant to contemplate.  She began to long to see him. She would go

and fawn upon him slavelike--for this would have to be her attitude, of

course--and maybe she would find that time had modified him, and that he

would be glad to see his long-forgotten old nurse and treat her gently.

That would be lovely; that would make her forget her woes and her

poverty.



Her poverty!  That thought inspired her to add another castle to her

dream: maybe he would give her a trifle now and then--maybe a dollar,

once a month, say; any little thing like that would help, oh, ever so

much.



By the time she reached Dawson's Landing, she was her old self again; her

blues were gone, she was in high feather.  She would get along, surely;

there were many kitchens where the servants would share their meals with

her, and also steal sugar and apples and other dainties for her to carry

home--or give her a chance to pilfer them herself, which would answer

just as well.  And there was the church. She was a more rabid and devoted

Methodist than ever, and her piety was no sham, but was strong and

sincere.  Yes, with plenty of creature comforts and her old place in the

amen corner in her possession again, she would be perfectly happy and at

peace thenceforward to the end.



She went to Judge Driscoll's kitchen first of all.  She was received

there in great form and with vast enthusiasm.  Her wonderful travels, and

the strange countries she had seen, and the adventures she had had, made

her a marvel and a heroine of romance.  The Negros hung enchanted upon a

great story of her experiences, interrupting her all along with eager

questions, with laughter, exclamations of delight, and expressions of

applause; and she was obliged to confess to herself that if there was

anything better in this world than steamboating, it was the glory to be

got by telling about it.  The audience loaded her stomach with their

dinners, and then stole the pantry bare to load up her basket.



Tom was in St. Louis.  The servants said he had spent the best part of

his time there during the previous two years.  Roxy came every day, and

had many talks about the family and its affairs.  Once she asked why Tom

was away so much.  The ostensible "Chambers" said:



"De fac' is, ole marster kin git along better when young marster's away

den he kin when he's in de town; yes, en he love him better, too; so he

gives him fifty dollahs a month--"



"No, is dat so?  Chambers, you's a-jokin', ain't you?"



"'Clah to goodness I ain't, Mammy; Marse Tom tole me so his own self. But

nemmine, 'tain't enough."



"My lan', what de reason 'tain't enough?"



"Well, I's gwine to tell you, if you gimme a chanst, Mammy. De reason it

ain't enough is 'ca'se Marse Tom gambles."



Roxy threw up her hands in astonishment, and Chambers went on:



"Ole marster found it out, 'ca'se he had to pay two hundred dollahs for

Marse Tom's gamblin' debts, en dat's true, Mammy, jes as dead certain as

you's bawn."



"Two--hund'd dollahs!  Why, what is you talkin' 'bout?

Two--hund'd--dollahs.  Sakes alive, it's 'mos' enough to buy a tol'able

good secondhand nigger wid.  En you ain't lyin', honey? You wouldn't lie

to you' old Mammy?"



"It's God's own truth, jes as I tell you--two hund'd dollahs--I wisht I

may never stir outen my tracks if it ain't so. En, oh, my lan', ole Marse

was jes a-hoppin'!  He was b'ilin' mad, I tell you!  He tuck 'n'

dissenhurrit him."



"Disen_whiched_ him?"



"Dissenhurrit him."



"What's dat?  What do you mean?"



"Means he bu'sted de will."



"Bu's--ted de will!  He wouldn't _ever_ treat him so!  Take it back, you

mis'able imitation nigger dat I bore in sorrow en tribbilation."



Roxy's pet castle--an occasional dollar from Tom's pocket--was tumbling

to ruin before her eyes.  She could not abide such a disaster as that;

she couldn't endure the thought of it. Her remark amused Chambers.



"Yah-yah-yah!  Jes listen to dat!  If I's imitation, what is you? Bofe of

us is imitation _white_--dat's what we is--en pow'ful good imitation,

too.  Yah-yah-yah!  We don't 'mount to noth'n as imitation _niggers_; en

as for--"



"Shet up yo' foolin', 'fo' I knock you side de head, en tell me 'bout de

will.  Tell me 'tain't bu'sted--do, honey, en I'll never forgit you."



"Well, _'tain't_--'ca'se dey's a new one made, en Marse Tom's all right

ag'in.  But what is you in sich a sweat 'bout it for, Mammy?  'Tain't

none o' your business I don't reckon."



"'Tain't none o' my business?  Whose business is it den, I'd like to

know?  Wuz I his mother tell he was fifteen years old, or wusn't I?--you

answer me dat.  En you speck I could see him turned out po' and ornery on

de worl' en never care noth'n' 'bout it?  I reckon if you'd ever be'n a

mother yo'self, Valet de Chambers, you wouldn't talk sich foolishness as

dat."



"Well, den, ole Marse forgive him en fixed up de will ag'in--do dat

satisfy you?"



Yes, she was satisfied now, and quite happy and sentimental over it. She

kept coming daily, and at last she was told that Tom had come home. She

began to tremble with emotion, and straightway sent to beg him to let his

"po' ole nigger Mammy have jes one sight of him en die for joy."



Tom was stretched at his lazy ease on a sofa when Chambers brought the

petition.  Time had not modified his ancient detestation of the humble

drudge and protector of his boyhood; it was still bitter and

uncompromising.  He sat up and bent a severe gaze upon the face of the

young fellow whose name he was unconsciously using and whose family

rights he was enjoying.  He maintained the gaze until the victim of it

had become satisfactorily pallid with terror, then he said:



"What does the old rip want with me?"



The petition was meekly repeated.



"Who gave you permission to come and disturb me with the social

attentions of niggers?"



Tom had risen.  The other young man was trembling now, visibly. He saw

what was coming, and bent his head sideways, and put up his left arm to

shield it.  Tom rained cuffs upon the head and its shield, saying no

word:  the victim received each blow with a beseeching, "Please, Marse

Tom!--oh, please, Marse Tom!"  Seven blows--then Tom said, "Face the

door--march!"  He followed behind with one, two, three solid kicks.  The

last one helped the pure-white slave over the door-sill, and he limped

away mopping his eyes with his old, ragged sleeve.  Tom shouted after

him, "Send her in!"



Then he flung himself panting on the sofa again, and rasped out the

remark, "He arrived just at the right moment; I was full to the brim with

bitter thinkings, and nobody to take it out of.  How refreshing it was!

I feel better."



Tom's mother entered now, closing the door behind her, and approached her

son with all the wheedling and supplication servilities that fear and

interest can impart to the words and attitudes of the born slave. She

stopped a yard from her boy and made two or three admiring exclamations

over his manly stature and general handsomeness, and Tom put an arm under

his head and hoisted a leg over the sofa back in order to look properly

indifferent.



"My lan', how you is growed, honey!  'Clah to goodness, I wouldn't

a-knowed you, Marse Tom!  'Deed I wouldn't!  Look at me good; does you

'member old Roxy?  Does you know yo' old nigger mammy, honey? Well now, I

kin lay down en die in peace, 'ca'se I'se seed--"



"Cut it short, Goddamn it, cut it short!  What is it you want?"



"You heah dat?  Jes the same old Marse Tom, al'ays so gay and funnin' wid

de ole mammy.  I'uz jes as shore--"



"Cut it short, I tell you, and get along!  What do you want?"



This was a bitter disappointment.  Roxy had for so many days nourished

and fondled and petted her notion that Tom would be glad to see his old

nurse, and would make her proud and happy to the marrow with a cordial

word or two, that it took two rebuffs to convince her that he was not

funning, and that her beautiful dream was a fond and foolish variety, a

shabby and pitiful mistake.  She was hurt to the heart, and so ashamed

that for a moment she did not quite know what to do or how to act.  Then

her breast began to heave, the tears came, and in her forlornness she was

moved to try that other dream of hers--an appeal to her boy's charity;

and so, upon the impulse, and without reflection, she offered her

supplication:



"Oh, Marse Tom, de po' ole mammy is in sich hard luck dese days; en she's

kinder crippled in de arms and can't work, en if you could gimme a

dollah--on'y jes one little dol--"



Tom was on his feet so suddenly that the supplicant was startled into a

jump herself.



"A dollar!--give you a dollar!  I've a notion to strangle you! Is _that_

your errand here?  Clear out!  And be quick about it!"



Roxy backed slowly toward the door.  When she was halfway she stopped,

and said mournfully:



"Marse Tom, I nussed you when you was a little baby, en I raised you all

by myself tell you was 'most a young man; en now you is young en rich, en

I is po' en gitt'n ole, en I come heah b'leavin' dat you would he'p de

ole mammy 'long down de little road dat's lef' 'twix' her en de grave,

en--"



Tom relished this tune less than any that he preceded it, for it began to

wake up a sort of echo in his conscience; so he interrupted and said with

decision, though without asperity, that he was not in a situation to help

her, and wasn't going to do it.



"Ain't you ever gwine to he'p me, Marse Tom?"



"No!  Now go away and don't bother me any more."



Roxy's head was down, in an attitude of humility.  But now the fires of

her old wrongs flamed up in her breast and began to burn fiercely. She

raised her head slowly, till it was well up, and at the same time her

great frame unconsciously assumed an erect and masterful attitude, with

all the majesty and grace of her vanished youth in it. She raised her

finger and punctuated with it.



"You has said de word.  You has had yo' chance, en you has trompled it

under yo' foot.  When you git another one, you'll git down on yo' knees

en _beg_ for it!"



A cold chill went to Tom's heart, he didn't know why; for he did not

reflect that such words, from such an incongruous source, and so solemnly

delivered, could not easily fail of that effect. However, he did the

natural thing: he replied with bluster and mockery.



"_You'll_ give me a chance--_you_!  Perhaps I'd better get down on my

knees now!  But in case I don't--just for argument's sake--what's going

to happen, pray?"



"Dis is what is gwine to happen, I's gwine as straight to yo' uncle as I

kin walk, en tell him every las' thing I knows 'bout you."



Tom's cheek blenched, and she saw it.  Disturbing thoughts began to chase

each other through his head.  "How can she know? And yet she must have

found out--she looks it.  I've had the will back only three months, and

am already deep in debt again, and moving heaven and earth to save myself

from exposure and destruction, with a reasonably fair show of getting the

thing covered up if I'm let alone, and now this fiend has gone and found

me out somehow or other. I wonder how much she knows?  Oh, oh, oh, it's

enough to break a body's heart!  But I've got to humor her--there's no

other way."



Then he worked up a rather sickly sample of a gay laugh and a hollow

chipperness of manner, and said:



"Well, well, Roxy dear, old friends like you and me mustn't quarrel.

Here's your dollar--now tell me what you know."



He held out the wildcat bill; she stood as she was, and made no movement.

It was her turn to scorn persuasive foolery now, and she did not waste

it.  She said, with a grim implacability in voice and manner which made

Tom almost realize that even a former slave can remember for ten minutes

insults and injuries returned for compliments and flatteries received,

and can also enjoy taking revenge for them when the opportunity offers:



"What does I know?  I'll tell you what I knows, I knows enough to bu'st

dat will to flinders--en more, mind you, _more!_"



Tom was aghast.



"More?" he said, "What do you call more?  Where's there any room for

more?"



Roxy laughed a mocking laugh, and said scoffingly, with a toss of her

head, and her hands on her hips:



"Yes!--oh, I reckon!  _co'se_ you'd like to know--wid yo' po' little ole

rag dollah.  What you reckon I's gwine to tell _you_ for?--you ain't got

no money.  I's gwine to tell yo' uncle--en I'll do it dis minute,

too--he'll gimme FIVE dollahs for de news, en mighty glad, too."



She swung herself around disdainfully, and started away. Tom was in a

panic.  He seized her skirts, and implored her to wait. She turned and

said, loftily:



"Look-a-heah, what 'uz it I tole you?"



"You--you--I don't remember anything.  What was it you told me?"



"I tole you dat de next time I give you a chance you'd git down on yo'

knees en beg for it."



Tom was stupefied for a moment.  He was panting with excitement. Then he

said:



"Oh, Roxy, you wouldn't require your young master to do such a horrible

thing.  You can't mean it."



"I'll let you know mighty quick whether I means it or not! You call me

names, en as good as spit on me when I comes here, po' en ornery en

'umble, to praise you for bein' growed up so fine and handsome, en tell

you how I used to nuss you en tend you en watch you when you 'uz sick en

hadn't no mother but me in de whole worl', en beg you to give de po' ole

nigger a dollah for to get her som'n' to eat, en you call me

names--_names_, dad blame you!  Yassir, I gives you jes one chance mo',

and dat's _now_, en it las' on'y half a second--you hear?"



Tom slumped to his knees and began to beg, saying:



"You see I'm begging, and it's honest begging, too!  Now tell me, Roxy,

tell me."



The heir of two centuries of unatoned insult and outrage looked down on

him and seemed to drink in deep draughts of satisfaction. Then she said:



"Fine nice young white gen'l'man kneelin' down to a nigger wench! I's

wanted to see dat jes once befo' I's called.  Now, Gabr'el, blow de hawn,

I's ready . . .  Git up!"



Tom did it.  He said, humbly:



"Now, Roxy, don't punish me any more.  I deserved what I've got, but be

good and let me off with that.  Don't go to uncle.  Tell me--I'll give

you the five dollars."



"Yes, I bet you will; en you won't stop dah, nuther.  But I ain't gwine

to tell you heah--"



"Good gracious, no!"



"Is you 'feared o' de ha'nted house?"



"N-no."



"Well, den, you come to de ha'nted house 'bout ten or 'leven tonight, en

climb up de ladder, 'ca'se de sta'rsteps is broke down, en you'll find

me.  I's a-roostin' in de ha'nted house 'ca'se I can't 'ford to roos'

nowher's else."  She started toward the door, but stopped and said,

"Gimme de dollah bill!"  He gave it to her. She examined it and said,

"H'm--like enough de bank's bu'sted." She started again, but halted

again.  "Has you got any whisky?"



"Yes, a little."



"Fetch it!"



He ran to his room overhead and brought down a bottle which was

two-thirds full.  She tilted it up and took a drink. Her eyes sparkled

with satisfaction, and she tucked the bottle under her shawl, saying,

"It's prime.  I'll take it along."



Tom humbly held the door for her, and she marched out as grim and erect

as a grenadier.









CHAPTER 9



Tom Practices Sycophancy



Why is it that we rejoice at a birth and grieve at a funeral? It is

because we are not the person involved.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



It is easy to find fault, if one has that disposition.  There was once a

man who, not being able to find any other fault with his coal, complained

that there were too many prehistoric toads in it.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Tom flung himself on the sofa, and put his throbbing head in his hands,

and rested his elbows on his knees.  He rocked himself back and forth and

moaned.



"I've knelt to a nigger wench!" he muttered.  "I thought I had struck the

deepest depths of degradation before, but oh, dear, it was nothing to

this. . . .   Well, there is one consolation, such as it is--I've struck

bottom this time; there's nothing lower."



But that was a hasty conclusion.



At ten that night he climbed the ladder in the haunted house, pale, weak,

and wretched.  Roxy was standing in the door of one of the rooms,

waiting, for she had heard him.



This was a two-story log house which had acquired the reputation a few

years ago of being haunted, and that was the end of its usefulness.

Nobody would live in it afterward, or go near it by night, and most

people even gave it a wide berth in the daytime. As it had no

competition, it was called _the_ haunted house. It was getting crazy and

ruinous now, from long neglect. It stood three hundred yards beyond

Pudd'nhead Wilson's house, with nothing between but vacancy.  It was the

last house in the town at that end.



Tom followed Roxy into the room.  She had a pile of clean straw in the

corner for a bed, some cheap but well-kept clothing was hanging on the

wall, there was a tin lantern freckling the floor with little spots of

light, and there were various soap and candle boxes scattered about,

which served for chairs.  The two sat down.  Roxy said:



"Now den, I'll tell you straight off, en I'll begin to k'leck de money

later on; I ain't in no hurry.  What does you reckon I's gwine to tell

you?"



"Well, you--you--oh, Roxy, don't make it too hard for me! Come right out

and tell me you've found out somehow what a shape I'm in on account of

dissipation and foolishness."



"Disposition en foolishness!  NO sir, dat ain't it.  Dat jist ain't

nothin' at all, 'longside o' what _I_ knows."



Tom stared at her, and said:



"Why, Roxy, what do you mean?"



She rose, and gloomed above him like a Fate.



"I means dis--en it's de Lord's truth.  You ain't no more kin to ole

Marse Driscoll den I is!  _dat's_  what I means!" and her eyes flamed

with triumph.



"What?"



"Yassir, en _dat_ ain't all!  You's a _nigger!_--_bawn_ a nigger and a

_slave!_--en you's a nigger en a slave dis minute; en if I opens my mouf

ole Marse Driscoll'll sell you down de river befo' you is two days older

den what you is now!"



"It's a thundering lie, you miserable old blatherskite!"



"It ain't no lie, nuther.  It's just de truth, en nothin' _but_ de truth,

so he'p me.  Yassir--you's my _son_--"



"You devil!"



"En dat po' boy dat you's be'n a-kickin' en a-cuffin' today is Percy

Driscoll's son en yo' _marster_--"



"You beast!"



"En _his_ name is Tom Driscoll, en _yo's_ name's Valet de Chambers, en

you ain't GOT no fambly name, beca'se niggers don't _have_ em!"



Tom sprang up and seized a billet of wood and raised it, but his mother

only laughed at him, and said:



"Set down, you pup!  Does you think you kin skyer me?  It ain't in you,

nor de likes of you.  I reckon you'd shoot me in de back, maybe, if you

got a chance, for dat's jist yo' style--_I_ knows you, throo en

throo--but I don't mind gitt'n killed, beca'se all dis is down in writin'

and it's in safe hands, too, en de man dat's got it knows whah to look

for de right man when I gits killed. Oh, bless yo' soul, if you puts yo'

mother up for as big a fool as _you_ is, you's pow'ful mistaken, I kin

tell you! Now den, you set still en behave yo'self; en don't you git up

ag'in till I tell you!"



Tom fretted and chafed awhile in a whirlwind of disorganizing sensations

and emotions, and finally said, with something like settled conviction:



"The whole thing is moonshine; now then, go ahead and do your worst; I'm

done with you."



Roxy made no answer.  She took the lantern and started for the door. Tom

was in a cold panic in a moment.



"Come back, come back!" he wailed.  "I didn't mean it, Roxy; I take it

all back, and I'll never say it again!  Please come back, Roxy!"



The woman stood a moment, then she said gravely:



"Dat's one thing you's got to stop, Valet de Chambers.  You can't call me

_Roxy_, same as if you was my equal.  Chillen don't speak to dey mammies

like dat.  You'll call me ma or mammy, dat's what you'll call

me--leastways when de ain't nobody aroun'.  _Say_ it!"



It cost Tom a struggle, but he got it out.



"Dat's all right, don't you ever forgit it ag'in, if you knows what's

good for you.  Now den, you had said you wouldn't ever call it lies en

moonshine ag'in.  I'll tell you dis, for a warnin': if you ever does say

it ag'in, it's de LAS' time you'll ever say it to me; I'll tramp as

straight to de judge as I kin walk, en tell him who you is, en _prove_

it.  Does you b'lieve me when I says dat?"



"Oh," groaned Tom, "I more than believe it; I _know_ it."



Roxy knew her conquest was complete.  She could have proved nothing to

anybody, and her threat of writings was a lie; but she knew the person

she was dealing with, and had made both statements without any doubt as

to the effect they would produce.



She went and sat down on her candle box, and the pride and pomp of her

victorious attitude made it a throne.  She said:



"Now den, Chambers, we's gwine to talk business, en dey ain't gwine to be

no mo' foolishness.  In de fust place, you gits fifty dollahs a month;

you's gwine to han' over half of it to yo' ma.  Plank it out!"



But Tom had only six dollars in the world.  He gave her that, and

promised to start fair on next month's pension.



"Chambers, how much is you in debt?"



Tom shuddered, and said:



"Nearly three hundred dollars."



"How is you gwine to pay it?"



Tom groaned out:  "Oh, I don't know; don't ask me such awful questions."



But she stuck to her point until she wearied a confession out of him: he

had been prowling about in disguise, stealing small valuables from

private houses; in fact, he made a good deal of a raid on his fellow

villagers a fortnight before, when he was supposed to be in St. Louis;

but he doubted if he had sent away enough stuff to realize the required

amount, and was afraid to make a further venture in the present excited

state of the town.  His mother approved of his conduct, and offered to

help, but this frightened him.  He tremblingly ventured to say that if

she would retire from the town he should feel better and safer, and could

hold his head higher--and was going on to make an argument, but she

interrupted and surprised him pleasantly by saying she was ready; it

didn't make any difference to her where she stayed, so that she got her

share of the pension regularly.  She said she would not go far, and would

call at the haunted house once a month for her money. Then she said:



"I don't hate you so much now, but I've hated you a many a year--and

anybody would.  Didn't I change you off, en give you a good fambly en a

good name, en made you a white gen'l'man en rich, wid store clothes

on--en what did I git for it?  You despised me all de time, en was al'ays

sayin' mean hard things to me befo' folks, en wouldn't ever let me forgit

I's a nigger--en--en--"



She fell to sobbing, and broke down.  Tom said:  "But you know I didn't

know you were my mother; and besides--"



"Well, nemmine 'bout dat, now; let it go.  I's gwine to fo'git it." Then

she added fiercely, "En don't ever make me remember it ag'in, or you'll

be sorry, _I_ tell you."



When they were parting, Tom said, in the most persuasive way he could

command:



"Ma, would you mind telling me who was my father?"



He had supposed he was asking an embarrassing question.  He was mistaken.

Roxy drew herself up with a proud toss of her head, and said:



"Does I mine tellin' you?  No, dat I don't!  You ain't got no 'casion to

be shame' o' yo' father, _I_ kin tell you.  He wuz de highest quality in

dis whole town--ole Virginny stock.  Fust famblies, he wuz. Jes as good

stock as de Driscolls en de Howards, de bes' day dey ever seed."  She put

on a little prouder air, if possible, and added impressively:  "Does you

'member Cunnel Cecil Burleigh Essex, dat died de same year yo' young

Marse Tom Driscoll's pappy died, en all de Masons en Odd Fellers en

Churches turned out en give him de bigges' funeral dis town ever seed?

Dat's de man."



Under the inspiration of her soaring complacency the departed graces of

her earlier days returned to her, and her bearing took to itself a

dignity and state that might have passed for queenly if her surroundings

had been a little more in keeping with it.



"Dey ain't another nigger in dis town dat's as highbawn as you is. Now

den, go 'long!  En jes you hold yo' head up as high as you want to--you

has de right, en dat I kin swah."









CHAPTER 10



The Nymph Revealed



All say, "How hard it is that we have to die"--a strange complaint to

come from the mouths of people who have had to live.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



When angry, count four; when very angry, swear.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Every now and then, after Tom went to bed, he had sudden wakings out of

his sleep, and his first thought was, "Oh, joy, it was all a dream!"

Then he laid himself heavily down again, with a groan and the muttered

words, "A nigger!  I am a nigger!  Oh, I wish I was dead!"



He woke at dawn with one more repetition of this horror, and then he

resolved to meddle no more with that treacherous sleep. He began to

think.  Sufficiently bitter thinkings they were. They wandered along

something after this fashion:



"Why were niggers _and_ whites made?  What crime did the uncreated first

nigger commit that the curse of birth was decreed for him? And why is

this awful difference made between white and black? . . . How hard the

nigger's fate seems, this morning!--yet until last night such a thought

never entered my head."



He sighed and groaned an hour or more away.  Then "Chambers" came humbly

in to say that breakfast was nearly ready.  "Tom" blushed scarlet to see

this aristocratic white youth cringe to him, a nigger, and call him

"Young Marster."  He said roughly:



"Get out of my sight!" and when the youth was gone, he muttered, "He has

done me no harm, poor wretch, but he is an eyesore to me now, for he is

Driscoll, the young gentleman, and I am a--oh, I wish I was dead!"



A gigantic eruption, like that of Krakatoa a few years ago, with the

accompanying earthquakes, tidal waves, and clouds of volcanic dust,

changes the face of the surrounding landscape beyond recognition,

bringing down the high lands, elevating the low, making fair lakes where

deserts had been, and deserts where green prairies had smiled before.

The tremendous catastrophe which had befallen Tom had changed his moral

landscape in much the same way. Some of his low places he found lifted to

ideals, some of his ideas had sunk to the valleys, and lay there with the

sackcloth and ashes of pumice stone and sulphur on their ruined heads.



For days he wandered in lonely places, thinking, thinking, thinking

--trying to get his bearings.  It was new work.  If he met a friend, he

found that the habit of a lifetime had in some mysterious way vanished

--his arm hung limp, instead of involuntarily extending the hand for a

shake. It was the "nigger" in him asserting its humility,  and he blushed

and was abashed.  And the "nigger" in him was surprised when the white

friend put out his hand for a shake with him.  He found the "nigger" in

him involuntarily giving the road, on the sidewalk, to a white rowdy and

loafer.  When Rowena, the dearest thing his heart knew, the idol of his

secret worship, invited him in, the "nigger" in him made an embarrassed

excuse and was afraid to enter and sit with the dread white folks on

equal terms.  The "nigger" in him went shrinking and skulking here and

there and yonder, and fancying it saw suspicion and maybe detection in

all faces, tones, and gestures.  So strange and uncharacteristic was

Tom's conduct that people noticed it, and turned to look after him when

he passed on; and when he glanced back--as he could not help doing, in

spite of his best resistance--and caught that puzzled expression in a

person's face, it gave him a sick feeling, and he took himself out of

view as quickly as he could.  He presently came to have a hunted sense

and a hunted look, and then he fled away to the hilltops and the

solitudes. He said to himself that the curse of Ham was upon him.



He dreaded his meals; the "nigger" in him was ashamed to sit at the white

folk's table, and feared discovery all the time; and once when Judge

Driscoll said, "What's the matter with you?  You look as meek as a

nigger," he felt as secret murderers are said to feel when the accuser

says, "Thou art the man!"  Tom said he was not well, and left the table.



His ostensible "aunt's" solicitudes and endearments were become a terror

to him, and he avoided them.



And all the time, hatred of his ostensible "uncle" was steadily growing

in his heart; for he said to himself, "He is white; and I am his chattel,

his property, his goods, and he can sell me, just as he could his dog."



For as much as a week after this, Tom imagined that his character had

undergone a pretty radical change.  But that was because he did not know

himself.



In several ways his opinions were totally changed, and would never go

back to what they were before, but the main structure of his character

was not changed, and could not be changed.  One or two very important

features of it were altered, and in time effects would result from this,

if opportunity offered--effects of a quite serious nature, too. Under the

influence of a great mental and moral upheaval, his character and his

habits had taken on the appearance of complete change, but after a while

with the subsidence of the storm, both began to settle toward their

former places.  He dropped gradually back into his old frivolous and

easygoing ways and conditions of feeling and manner of speech, and no

familiar of his could have detected anything in him that differentiated

him from the weak and careless Tom of other days.



The theft raid which he had made upon the village turned out better than

he had ventured to hope.  It produced the sum necessary to pay his gaming

debts, and saved him from exposure to his uncle and another smashing of

the will.  He and his mother learned to like each other fairly well.  She

couldn't love him, as yet, because there "warn't nothing _to_ him," as

she expressed it, but her nature needed something or somebody to rule

over, and he was better than nothing.  Her strong character and

aggressive and commanding ways compelled Tom's admiration in spite of the

fact that he got more illustrations of them than he needed for his

comfort. However, as a rule her conversation was made up of racy tales

about the privacies of the chief families of the town (for she went

harvesting among their kitchens every time she came to the village), and

Tom enjoyed this.  It was just in his line.  She always collected her

half of his pension punctually, and he was always at the haunted house to

have a chat with her on these occasions.  Every now and then, she paid

him a visit there on between-days also.



Occasions he would run up to St. Louis for a few weeks, and at last

temptation caught him again.  He won a lot of money, but lost it, and

with it a deal more besides, which he promised to raise as soon as

possible.



For this purpose he projected a new raid on his town.  He never meddled

with any other town, for he was afraid to venture into houses whose ins

and outs he did not know and the habits of whose households he was not

acquainted with.  He arrived at the haunted house in disguise on the

Wednesday before the advent of the twins--after writing his Aunt Pratt

that he would not arrive until two days after--and laying in hiding there

with his mother until toward daylight Friday morning, when he went to his

uncle's house and entered by the back way with his own key, and slipped

up to his room where he could have the use of the mirror and toilet

articles.  He had a suit of girl's clothes with him in a bundle as a

disguise for his raid, and was wearing a suit of his mother's clothing,

with black gloves and veil.  By dawn he was tricked out for his raid, but

he caught a glimpse of Pudd'nhead Wilson through the window over the way,

and knew that Pudd'nhead had caught a glimpse of him. So he entertained

Wilson with some airs and graces and attitudes for a while, then stepped

out of sight and resumed the other disguise, and by and by went down and

out the back way and started downtown to reconnoiter the scene of his

intended labors.



But he was ill at ease.  He had changed back to Roxy's dress, with the

stoop of age added to the disguise, so that Wilson would not bother

himself about a humble old women leaving a neighbor's house by the back

way in the early morning, in case he was still spying.  But supposing

Wilson had seen him leave, and had thought it suspicious, and had also

followed him? The thought made Tom cold.  He gave up the raid for the

day, and hurried back to the haunted house by the obscurest route he

knew. His mother was gone; but she came back, by and by, with the news of

the grand reception at Patsy Cooper's, and soon persuaded him that the

opportunity was like a special Providence, it was so inviting and

perfect.  So he went raiding, after all, and made a nice success of it

while everybody was gone to Patsy Cooper's. Success gave him nerve and

even actual intrepidity; insomuch, indeed, that after he had conveyed his

harvest to his mother in a back alley, he went to the reception himself,

and added several of the valuables of that house to his takings.



After this long digression we have now arrived once more at the point

where Pudd'nhead Wilson, while waiting for the arrival of the twins on

that same Friday evening, sat puzzling over the strange apparition of

that morning--a girl in young Tom Driscoll's bedroom; fretting, and

guessing, and puzzling over it, and wondering who the shameless creature

might be.









CHAPTER 11



Pudd'nhead's Thrilling Discovery



There are three infallible ways of pleasing an author, and the three

form a rising scale of compliment:  1--to tell him you have read one of

his books; 2--to tell him you have read all of his books; 3--to ask him

to let you read the manuscript of his forthcoming book. No. 1 admits you

to his respect; No. 2 admits you to his admiration; No. 3 carries you

clear into his heart.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



As to the Adjective: when in doubt, strike it out.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



The twins arrived presently, and talk began.  It flowed along chattily

and sociably, and under its influence the new friendship gathered ease

and strength.  Wilson got out his Calendar, by request, and read a

passage or two from it, which the twins praised quite cordially. This

pleased the author so much that he complied gladly when they asked him to

lend them a batch of the work to read at home.  In the course of their

wide travels, they had found out that there are three sure ways of

pleasing an author; they were now working the best of the three.



There was an interruption now.  Young Driscoll appeared, and joined the

party.  He pretended to be seeing the distinguished strangers for the

first time when they rose to shake hands; but this was only a blind, as

he had already had a glimpse of them, at the reception, while robbing the

house.  The twins made mental note that he was smooth-faced and rather

handsome, and smooth and undulatory in his movements--graceful, in fact.

Angelo thought he had a good eye; Luigi thought there was something

veiled and sly about it.  Angelo thought he had a pleasant free-and-easy

way of talking; Luigi thought it was more so than was agreeable. Angelo

thought he was a sufficiently nice young man; Luigi reserved his

decision.  Tom's first contribution to the conversation was a question

which he had put to Wilson a hundred times before. It was always cheerily

and good-natured put, and always inflicted a little pang, for it touched

a secret sore; but this time the pang was sharp, since strangers were

present.



"Well, how does the law come on?  Had a case yet?"



Wilson bit his lip, but answered, "No--not yet," with as much

indifference as he could assume.  Judge Driscoll had generously left the

law feature out of Wilson's biography which he had furnished to the

twins.  Young Tom laughed pleasantly, and said:



"Wilson's a lawyer, gentlemen, but he doesn't practice now."



The sarcasm bit, but Wilson kept himself under control, and said without

passion:



"I don't practice, it is true.  It is true that I have never had a case,

and have had to earn a poor living for twenty years as an expert

accountant in a town where I can't get a hold of a set of books to

untangle as often as I should like.  But it is also true that I did

myself well for the practice of the law.  By the time I was your age,

Tom, I had chosen a profession, and was soon competent to enter upon it."

Tom winced.  "I never got a chance to try my hand at it, and I may never

get a chance; and yet if I ever do get it, I shall be found ready, for I

have kept up my law studies all these years."



"That's it; that's good grit!  I like to see it.  I've a notion to throw

all my business your way.  My business and your law practice ought to

make a pretty gay team, Dave," and the young fellow laughed again.



"If you will throw--"  Wilson had thought of the girl in Tom's bedroom,

and was going to say, "If you will throw the surreptitious and

disreputable part of your business my way, it may amount to something,"

but thought better of it and said,



"However, this matter doesn't fit well in a general conversation."



"All right, we'll change the subject; I guess you were about to give me

another dig, anyway, so I'm willing to change. How's the Awful Mystery

flourishing these days?  Wilson's got a scheme for driving plain window

glass panes out of the market by decorating it with greasy finger marks,

and getting rich by selling it at famine prices to the crowned heads over

in Europe to outfit their palaces with. Fetch it out, Dave."



Wilson brought three of his glass strips, and said:



"I get the subject to pass the fingers of his right hand through his hair,

so as to get a little coating of the natural oil on them, and then press

the balls of them on the glass.  A fine and delicate print of the lines

in the skin results, and is permanent, if it doesn't come in contact with

something able to rub it off. You begin, Tom."



"Why, I think you took my finger marks once or twice before."



"Yes, but you were a little boy the last time, only about twelve years

old."



"That's so.  Of course, I've changed entirely since then, and variety is

what the crowned heads want, I guess."



He passed his fingers through his crop of short hair, and pressed them

one at a time on the glass.  Angelo made a print of his fingers on

another glass, and Luigi followed with a third.  Wilson marked the

glasses with names and dates, and put them away.  Tom gave one of his

little laughs, and said:



"I thought I wouldn't say anything, but if variety is what you are after,

you have wasted a piece of glass.  The hand print of one twin is the same

as the hand print of the fellow twin."



"Well, it's done now, and I like to have them both, anyway," said Wilson,

returned to his place.



"But look here, Dave," said Tom, "you used to tell people's fortunes, too,

when you took their finger marks.  Dave's just an all-round genius--a

genius of the first water, gentlemen; a great scientist running to seed

here in this village, a prophet with the kind of honor that prophets

generally get at home--for here they don't give shucks for his

scientifics, and they call his skull a notion factory--hey, Dave, ain't

it so?  But never mind, he'll make his mark someday--finger mark, you

know, he-he!  But really, you want to let him take a shy at your palms

once; it's worth twice the price of admission or your money's returned at

the door.  Why, he'll read your wrinkles as easy as a book, and not only

tell you fifty or sixty things that's going to happen to you, but fifty

or sixty thousand that ain't.  Come, Dave, show the gentlemen what an

inspired jack-at-all-science we've got in this town, and don't know it."



Wilson winced under this nagging and not very courteous chaff, and the

twins suffered with him and for him.  They rightly judged, now, that the

best way to relieve him would be to take the thing in earnest and

treat it with respect, ignoring Tom's rather overdone raillery; so Luigi

said:



"We have seen something of palmistry in our wanderings, and know very

well what astonishing things it can do.  If it isn't a science, and one

of the greatest of them too, I don't know what its other name ought to

be.  In the Orient--"



Tom looked surprised and incredulous.  He said:



"That juggling a science?  But really, you ain't serious, are you?"



"Yes, entirely so.  Four years ago we had our hands read out to us as if

our plans had been covered with print."



"Well, do you mean to say there was actually anything in it?" asked Tom,

his incredulity beginning to weaken a little.



"There was this much in it," said Angelo:  "what was told us of our

characters was minutely exact--we could have not have bettered it

ourselves.  Next, two or three memorable things that have happened to us

were laid bare--things which no one present but ourselves could have

known about."



"Why, it's rank sorcery!" exclaimed Tom, who was now becoming very much

interested.  "And how did they make out with what was going to happen to

you in the future?"



"On the whole, quite fairly," said Luigi.  "Two or three of the most

striking things foretold have happened since; much the most striking one

of all happened within that same year.  Some of the minor prophesies have

come true; some of the minor and some of the major ones have not been

fulfilled yet, and of course may never be:  still, I should be more

surprised if they failed to arrive than if they didn't."



Tom was entirely sobered, and profoundly impressed.  He said,

apologetically:



"Dave, I wasn't meaning to belittle that science; I was only chaffing

--chattering, I reckon I'd better say.  I wish you would look at their

palms. Come, won't you?"



"Why certainly, if you want me to; but you know I've had no chance to

become an expert, and don't claim to be one.  When a past event is

somewhat prominently recorded in the palm, I can generally detect that,

but minor ones often escape me--not always, of course, but often--but I

haven't much confidence in myself when it comes to reading the future.  I

am talking as if palmistry was a daily study with me, but that is not so.

I haven't examined half a dozen hands in the last half dozen years; you

see, the people got to joking about it, and I stopped to let the talk die

down.  I'll tell you what we'll do, Count Luigi:  I'll make a try at your

past, and if I have any success there--no, on the whole, I'll let the

future alone; that's really the affair of an expert."



He took Luigi's hand.  Tom said:



"Wait--don't look yet, Dave!  Count Luigi, here's paper and pencil. Set

down that thing that you said was the most striking one that was foretold

to you, and happened less than a year afterward, and give it to me so I

can see if Dave finds it in your hand."



Luigi wrote a line privately, and folded up the piece of paper, and

handed it to Tom, saying:



"I'll tell you when to look at it, if he finds it."



Wilson began to study Luigi's palm, tracing life lines, heart lines, head

lines, and so on, and noting carefully their relations with the cobweb of

finer and more delicate marks and lines that enmeshed them on all sides;

he felt of the fleshy cushion at the base of the thumb and noted its

shape; he felt of the fleshy side of the hand between the wrist and the

base of the little finger and noted its shape also; he painstakingly

examined the fingers, observing their form, proportions, and natural

manner of disposing themselves when in repose. All this process was

watched by the three spectators with absorbing interest, their heads bent

together over Luigi's palm, and nobody disturbing the stillness with a

word.  Wilson now entered upon a close survey of the palm again, and his

revelations began.



He mapped out Luigi's character and disposition, his tastes, aversions,

proclivities, ambitions, and eccentricities in a way which sometimes made

Luigi wince and the others laugh, but both twins declared that the chart

was artistically drawn and was correct.



Next, Wilson took up Luigi's history.  He proceeded cautiously and with

hesitation now, moving his finger slowly along the great lines of the

palm, and now and then halting it at a "star" or some such landmark, and

examining that neighborhood minutely. He proclaimed one or two past

events, Luigi confirmed his correctness, and the search went on.

Presently Wilson glanced up suddenly with a surprised expression.



"Here is a record of an incident which you would perhaps not wish me

to--"



"Bring it out," said Luigi, good-naturedly.  "I promise you sha'n't

embarrass me."



But Wilson still hesitated, and did not seem quite to know what to do.

Then he said:



"I think it is too delicate a matter to--to--I believe I would rather

write it or whisper it to you, and let you decide for yourself whether

you want it talked out or not."



"That will answer," said Luigi.  "Write it."



Wilson wrote something on a slip of paper and handed it to Luigi, who

read it to himself and said to Tom:



"Unfold your slip and read it, Mr. Driscoll."



Tom said:



"'IT WAS PROPHESIED THAT I WOULD KILL A MAN.  IT CAME TRUE BEFORE THE

YEAR WAS OUT.'"



Tom added, "Great Scott!"



Luigi handed Wilson's paper to Tom, and said:



"Now read this one."



Tom read:



"'YOU HAVE KILLED SOMEONE, BUT WHETHER MAN, WOMAN, OR CHILD, I DO NOT

MAKE OUT.'"



"Caesar's ghost!" commented Tom, with astonishment. "It beats anything

that was ever heard of!  Why, a man's own hand is his deadliest enemy!

Just think of that--a man's own hand keeps a record of the deepest and

fatalest secrets of his life, and is treacherously ready to expose

himself to any black-magic stranger that comes along.  But what do you

let a person look at your hand for, with that awful thing printed on it?"



"Oh," said Luigi, reposefully, "I don't mind it.  I killed the man for

good reasons, and I don't regret it."



"What were the reasons?"



"Well, he needed killing."



"I'll tell you why he did it, since he won't say himself," said Angelo,

warmly.  "He did it to save my life, that's what he did it for. So it was

a noble act, and not a thing to be hid in the dark."



"So it was, so it was," said Wilson.  "To do such a thing to save a

brother's life is a great and fine action."



"Now come," said Luigi, "it is very pleasant to hear you say these

things, but for unselfishness, or heroism, or magnanimity, the

circumstances won't stand scrutiny.  You overlook one detail; suppose I

hadn't saved Angelo's life, what would have become of mine? If I had let

the man kill him, wouldn't he have killed me, too? I saved my own life,

you see."



"Yes, that is your way of talking," said Angelo, "but I know you--I

don't believe you thought of yourself at all.  I keep that weapon yet

that Luigi killed the man with, and I'll show it to you sometime. That

incident makes it interesting, and it had a history before it came into

Luigi's hands which adds to its interest.  It was given to Luigi by a

great Indian prince, the Gaikowar of Baroda, and it had been in his

family two or three centuries.  It killed a good many disagreeable people

who troubled the hearthstone at one time or another.  It isn't much too

look at, except it isn't shaped like other knives, or dirks, or whatever

it may be called--here, I'll draw it for you."  He took a sheet of paper

and made a rapid sketch.  "There it is--a broad and murderous blade, with

edges like a razor for sharpness. The devices engraved on it are the

ciphers or names of its long line of possessors--I had Luigi's name added

in Roman letters myself with our coat of arms, as you see.  You notice

what a curious handle the thing has.  It is solid ivory, polished like a

mirror, and is four or five inches long--round, and as thick as a large

man's wrist, with the end squared off flat, for your thumb to rest on;

for you grasp it, with your thumb resting on the blunt end--so--and lift

it along and strike downward.  The Gaikowar showed us how the thing was

done when he gave it to Luigi, and before that night was ended, Luigi had

used the knife, and the Gaikowar was a man short by reason of it.  The

sheath is magnificently ornamented with gems of great value.  You will

find a sheath more worth looking at than the knife itself, of course."



Tom said to himself:



"It's lucky I came here.  I would have sold that knife for a song; I

supposed the jewels were glass."



"But go on; don't stop," said Wilson.  "Our curiosity is up now, to hear

about the homicide.  Tell us about that."



"Well, briefly, the knife was to blame for that, all around. A native

servant slipped into our room in the palace in the night, to kill us and

steal the knife on account of the fortune encrusted on its sheath,

without a doubt.  Luigi had it under his pillow; we were in bed together.

There was a dim night-light burning. I was asleep, but Luigi was awake,

and he thought he detected a vague form nearing the bed.  He slipped the

knife out of the sheath and was ready and unembarrassed by hampering

bedclothes, for the weather was hot and we hadn't any.  Suddenly that

native rose at the bedside, and bent over me with his right hand lifted

and a dirk in it aimed at my throat; but Luigi grabbed his wrist, pulled

him downward, and drove his own knife into the man's neck. That is the

whole story."



Wilson and Tom drew deep breaths, and after some general chat about the

tragedy, Pudd'nhead said, taking Tom's hand:



"Now, Tom, I've never had a look at your palms, as it happens; perhaps

you've got some little questionable privacies that need--hel-lo!"



Tom had snatched away his hand, and was looking a good deal confused.



"Why, he's blushing!" said Luigi.



Tom darted an ugly look at him, and said sharply:



"Well, if I am, it ain't because I'm a murderer!"  Luigi's dark face

flushed, but before he could speak or move, Tom added with anxious haste:

"Oh, I beg a thousand pardons.  I didn't mean that; it was out before I

thought, and I'm very, very sorry--you must forgive me!"



Wilson came to the rescue, and smoothed things down as well as he could;

and in fact was entirely successful as far as the twins were concerned,

for they felt sorrier for the affront put upon him by his guest's

outburst of ill manners than for the insult offered to Luigi. But the

success was not so pronounced with the offender.  Tom tried to seem at

his ease, and he went through the motions fairly well, but at bottom he

felt resentful toward all the three witnesses of his exhibition; in fact,

he felt so annoyed at them for having witnessed it and noticed it that he

almost forgot to feel annoyed at himself for placing it before them.

However, something presently happened which made him almost comfortable,

and brought him nearly back to a state of charity and friendliness.  This

was a little spat between the twins; not much of a spat, but still a

spat; and before they got far with it, they were in a decided condition

of irritation while pretending to be actuated by more respectable

motives.  By his help the fire got warmed up to the blazing point, and he

might have had the happiness of seeing the flames show up in another

moment, but for the interruption of a knock on the door--an interruption

which fretted him as much as it gratified Wilson.  Wilson opened the

door.



The visitor was a good-natured, ignorant, energetic middle-aged Irishman

named John Buckstone, who was a great politician in a small way, and

always took a large share in public matters of every sort.  One of the

town's chief excitements, just now, was over the matter of rum.  There

was a strong rum party and a strong anti-rum party.  Buckstone was

training with the rum party, and he had been sent to hunt up the twins

and invite them to attend a mass meeting of that faction.  He delivered

his errand, and said the clans were already gathering in the big hall

over the market house. Luigi accepted the invitation cordially.  Angelo

less cordially, since he disliked crowds, and did not drink the powerful

intoxicants of America.  In fact, he was even a teetotaler sometimes

--when it was judicious to be one.



The twins left with Buckstone, and Tom Driscoll joined the company with

them uninvited.



In the distance, one could see a long wavering line of torches drifting

down the main street, and could hear the throbbing of the bass drum, the

clash of cymbals, the squeaking of a fife or two, and the faint roar of

remote hurrahs.  The tail end of this procession was climbing the market

house stairs when the twins arrived in its neighborhood; when they

reached the hall, it was full of people, torches, smoke, noise, and

enthusiasm. They were conducted to the platform by Buckstone--Tom

Driscoll still following--and were delivered to the chairman in the midst

of a prodigious explosion of welcome.  When the noise had moderated a

little, the chair proposed that "our illustrious guests be at once

elected, by complimentary acclamation, to membership in our ever-glorious

organization, the paradise of the free and the perdition of the slave."



This eloquent discharge opened the floodgates of enthusiasm again, and

the election was carried with thundering unanimity.  Then arose a storm

of cries:



"Wet them down!  Wet them down!  Give them a drink!"



Glasses of whisky were handed to the twins.  Luigi waves his aloft, then

brought it to his lips; but Angelo set his down. There was another storm

of cries.



"What's the matter with the other one?"  "What is the blond one going

back on us for?"  "Explain!  Explain!"



The chairman inquired, and then reported:



"We have made an unfortunate mistake, gentlemen.  I find that the Count

Angelo Capello is opposed to our creed--is a teetotaler, in fact, and was

not intending to apply for membership with us.  He desires that we

reconsider the vote by which he was elected.  What is the pleasure of the

house?"



There was a general burst of laughter, plentifully accented with

whistlings and catcalls, but the energetic use of the gavel presently

restored something like order.  Then a man spoke from the crowd, and said

that while he was very sorry that the mistake had been made, it would not

be possible to rectify it at the present meeting.  According to the

bylaws, it must go over to the next regular meeting for action.  He would

not offer a motion, as none was required.  He desired to apologize to the

gentlemen in the name of the house, and begged to assure him that as far

as it might lie in the power of the Sons of Liberty, his temporary

membership in the order would be made pleasant to him.



This speech was received with great applause, mixed with cries of:



"That's the talk!"  "He's a good fellow, anyway, if he _is_ a teetotaler!"

"Drink his health!"  "Give him a rouser, and no heeltaps!"



Glasses were handed around, and everybody on the platform drank Angelo's

health, while the house bellowed forth in song:





     For he's a jolly good fel-low,

     For he's a jolly good fel-low,

     For he's a jolly good fe-el-low,

     Which nobody can deny.



Tom Driscoll drank.  It was his second glass, for he had drunk Angelo's

the moment that Angelo had set it down.  The two drinks made him very

merry--almost idiotically so, and he began to take a most lively and

prominent part in the proceedings, particularly in the music and catcalls

and side remarks.



The chairman was still standing at the front, the twins at his side. The

extraordinarily close resemblance of the brothers to each other suggested

a witticism to Tom Driscoll, and just as the chairman began a speech he

skipped forward and said, with an air of tipsy confidence, to the

audience:



"Boys, I move that he keeps still and lets this human philopena snip you

out a speech."



The descriptive aptness of the phrase caught the house, and a mighty

burst of laughter followed.



Luigi's southern blood leaped to the boiling point in a moment under the

sharp humiliation of this insult delivered in the presence of four

hundred strangers.  It was not in the young man's nature to let the

matter pass, or to delay the squaring of the account. He took a couple of

strides and halted behind the unsuspecting joker. Then he drew back and

delivered a kick of such titanic vigor that it lifted Tom clear over the

footlights and landed him on the heads of the front row of the Sons of

Liberty.



Even a sober person does not like to have a human being emptied on him

when he is not going any harm; a person who is not sober cannot endure

such an attention at all.  The nest of Sons of Liberty that Driscoll

landed in had not a sober bird in it; in fact there was probably not an

entirely sober one in the auditorium.  Driscoll was promptly and

indignantly flung on the heads of Sons in the next row, and these Sons

passed him on toward the rear, and then immediately began to pummel the

front row Sons who had passed him to them.  This course was strictly

followed by bench after bench as Driscoll traveled in his tumultuous and

airy flight toward the door; so he left behind him an ever-lengthening

wake of raging and plunging and fighting and swearing humanity. Down went

group after group of torches, and presently above the deafening clatter

of the gavel, roar of angry voices, and crash of succumbing benches, rose

the paralyzing cry of "_fire!_"



The fighting ceased instantly; the cursing ceased; for one distinctly

defined moment, there was a dead hush, a motionless calm, where the

tempest had been; then with one impulse the multitude awoke to life and

energy again, and went surging and struggling and swaying, this way and

that, its outer edges melting away through windows and doors and

gradually lessening the pressure and relieving the mass.



The fireboys were never on hand so suddenly before; for there was no

distance to go this time, their quarters being in the rear end of the

market house,  There was an engine company and a hook-and-ladder company.

Half of each was composed of rummies and the other half of anti-rummies,

after the moral and political share-and-share-alike fashion of the

frontier town of the period. Enough anti-rummies were loafing in quarters

to man the engine and the ladders.  In two minutes they had their red

shirts and helmets on--they never stirred officially in unofficial

costume--and as the mass meeting overhead smashed through the long row of

windows and poured out upon the roof of the arcade, the deliverers were

ready for them with a powerful stream of water, which washed some of them

off the roof and nearly drowned the rest.  But water was preferable to

fire, and still the stampede from the windows continued, and still the

pitiless drenching assailed it until the building was empty; then the

fireboys mounted to the hall and flooded it with water enough to

annihilate forty times as much fire as there was there; for a village

fire company does not often get a chance to show off, and so when it does

get a chance, it makes the most of it. Such citizens of that village as

were of a thoughtful and judicious temperament did not insure against

fire; they insured against the fire company.









CHAPTER 12



The Shame of Judge Driscoll



Courage is resistance to fear, mastery of fear--not absence of fear.

Except a creature be part coward, it is not a compliment to say it is

brave; it is merely a loose misapplication of the word. Consider the

flea!--incomparably the bravest of all the creatures of God, if ignorance

of fear were courage.  Whether you are asleep or awake he will attack

you, caring nothing for the fact that in bulk and strength you are to him

as are the massed armies of the earth to a sucking child; he lives both

day and night and all days and nights in the very lap of peril and the

immediate presence of death, and yet is no more afraid than is the man

who walks the streets of a city that was threatened by an earthquake ten

centuries before.  When we speak of Clive, Nelson, and Putnam as men who

"didn't know what fear was," we ought always to add the flea--and put him

at the head of the procession.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Judge Driscoll was in bed and asleep by ten o'clock on Friday night, and

he was up and gone a-fishing before daylight in the morning with his

friend Pembroke Howard.  These two had been boys together in Virginia

when that state still ranked as the chief and most imposing member of the

Union, and they still coupled the proud and affectionate adjective "old"

with her name when they spoke of her. In Missouri a recognized

superiority attached to any person who hailed from Old Virginia; and this

superiority was exalted to supremacy when a person of such nativity could

also prove descent from the First Families of that great commonwealth.

The Howards and Driscolls were of this aristocracy.  In their eyes, it

was a nobility. It had its unwritten laws, and they were as clearly

defined and as strict as any that could be found among the printed

statues of the land. The F.F.V. was born a gentleman; his highest duty in

life was to watch over that great inheritance and keep it unsmirched. He

must keep his honor spotless.  Those laws were his chart; his course was

marked out on it; if he swerved from it by so much as half a point of the

compass, it meant shipwreck to his honor; that is to say, degradation

from his rank as a gentleman. These laws required certain things of him

which his religion might forbid: then his religion must yield--the laws

could not be relaxed to accommodate religions or anything else.  Honor

stood first; and the laws defined what it was and wherein it differed in

certain details from honor as defined by church creeds and by the social

laws and customs of some of the minor divisions of the globe that had got

crowded out when the sacred boundaries of Virginia were staked out.



If Judge Driscoll was the recognized first citizen of Dawson's Landing,

Pembroke Howard was easily its recognized second citizen. He was called

"the great lawyer"--an earned title.  He and Driscoll were of the same

age--a year or two past sixty.



Although Driscoll was a freethinker and Howard a strong and determined

Presbyterian, their warm intimacy suffered no impairment in consequence.

They were men whose opinions were their own property and not subject to

revision and amendment, suggestion or criticism, by anybody, even their

friends.



The day's fishing finished, they came floating downstream in their skiff,

talking national politics and other high matters, and presently met a

skiff coming up from town, with a man in it who said:



"I reckon you know one of the new twins gave your nephew a kicking last

night, Judge?"



"Did WHAT?"



"Gave him a kicking."



The old judge's lips paled, and his eyes began to flame.  He choked with

anger for a moment, then he got out what he was trying to say:



"Well--well--go on!  Give me the details!"



The man did it.  At the finish the judge was silent a minute, turning

over in his mind the shameful picture of Tom's flight over the

footlights; then he said, as if musing aloud,



"H'm--I don't understand it.  I was asleep at home.  He didn't wake me.

Thought he was competent to manage his affair without my help, I reckon."

His face lit up with pride and pleasure at that thought, and he said with

a cheery complacency, "I like that--it's the true old blood--hey,

Pembroke?"



Howard smiled an iron smile, and nodded his head approvingly. Then the

news-bringer spoke again.



"But Tom beat the twin on the trial."



The judge looked at the man wonderingly, and said:



"The trial?  What trial?"



"Why, Tom had him up before Judge Robinson for assault and battery."



The old man shrank suddenly together like one who has received a death

stroke.  Howard sprang for him as he sank forward in a swoon, and took

him in his arms, and bedded him on his back in the boat. He sprinkled

water in his face, and said to the startled visitor:



"Go, now--don't let him come to and find you here.  You see what an

effect your heedless speech has had; you ought to have been more

considerate than to blurt out such a cruel piece of slander as that."



"I'm right down sorry I did it now, Mr. Howard, and I wouldn't have done

it if I had thought; but it ain't slander; it's perfectly true, just as I

told him."



He rowed away.  Presently the old judge came out of his faint and looked

up piteously into the sympathetic face that was bent over him.



"Say it ain't true, Pembroke; tell me it ain't true!" he said in a weak

voice.



There was nothing weak in the deep organ tones that responded:



"You know it's a lie as well as I do, old friend.  He is of the best

blood of the Old Dominion."



"God bless you for saying it!" said the old gentleman, fervently. "Ah,

Pembroke, it was such a blow!"



Howard stayed by his friend, and saw him home, and entered the house with

him.  It was dark, and past supper-time, but the judge was not thinking

of supper; he was eager to hear the slander refuted from headquarters,

and as eager to have Howard hear it, too. Tom was sent for, and he came

immediately.  He was bruised and lame, and was not a happy-looking

object.  His uncle made him sit down, and said:



"We have been hearing about your adventure, Tom, with a handsome lie

added for embellishment.  Now pulverize that lie to dust! What measures

have you taken?  How does the thing stand?"



Tom answered guilelessly:  "It don't stand at all; it's all over. I had

him up in court and beat him.  Pudd'nhead Wilson defended him--first

case he ever had, and lost it.  The judge fined the miserable hound five

dollars for the assault."



Howard and the judge sprang to their feet with the opening sentence

--why, neither knew; then they stood gazing vacantly at each other.

Howard stood a moment, then sat mournfully down without saying anything.

The judge's wrath began to kindle, and he burst out:



"You cur!  You scum!  You vermin!  Do you mean to tell me that blood of

my race has suffered a blow and crawled to a court of law about it?

Answer me!"



Tom's head drooped, and he answered with an eloquent silence. His uncle

stared at him with a mixed expression of amazement and shame and

incredulity that was sorrowful to see.  At last he said:



"Which of the twins was it?"



"Count Luigi."



"You have challenged him?"



"N--no," hesitated Tom, turning pale.



"You will challenge him tonight.  Howard will carry it."



Tom began to turn sick, and to show it.  He turned his hat round and

round in his hand, his uncle glowering blacker and blacker upon him as

the heavy seconds drifted by; then at last he began to stammer, and said

piteously:



"Oh, please, don't ask me to do it, uncle!  He is a murderous devil--I

never could--I--I'm afraid of him!"



Old Driscoll's mouth opened and closed three times before he could get it

to perform its office; then he stormed out:



"A coward in my family!  A Driscoll a coward!  Oh, what have I done to

deserve this infamy!"  He tottered to his secretary in the corner,

repeated that lament again and again in heartbreaking tones, and got out

of a drawer a paper, which he slowly tore to bits, scattering the bits

absently in his track as he walked up and down the room, still grieving

and lamenting.  At last he said:



"There it is, shreds and fragments once more--my will.  Once more you

have forced me to disinherit you, you base son of a most noble father!

Leave my sight!  Go--before I spit on you!"



The young man did not tarry.  Then the judge turned to Howard:



"You will be my second, old friend?"



"Of course."



"There is pen and paper.  Draft the cartel, and lose no time."



"The Count shall have it in his hands in fifteen minutes," said Howard.



Tom was very heavyhearted.  His appetite was gone with his property and

his self-respect.  He went out the back way and wandered down the obscure

lane grieving, and wondering if any course of future conduct, however

discreet and carefully perfected and watched over, could win back his

uncle's favor and persuade him to reconstruct once more that generous

will which had just gone to ruin before his eyes. He finally concluded

that it could.  He said to himself that he had accomplished this sort of

triumph once already, and that what had been done once could be done

again.  He would set about it.  He would bend every energy to the task,

and he would score that triumph once more, cost what it might to his

convenience, limit as it might his frivolous and liberty-loving life.



"To begin," he says to himself, "I'll square up with the proceeds of my

raid, and then gambling has got to be stopped--and stopped short off.

It's the worst vice I've got--from my standpoint, anyway, because it's

the one he can most easily find out, through the impatience of my

creditors.  He thought it expensive to have to pay two hundred dollars to

them for me once.  Expensive--_that!_  Why, it cost me the whole of his

fortune--but, of course, he never thought of that; some people can't

think of any but their own side of a case. If he had known how deep I am

in now, the will would have gone to pot without waiting for a duel to

help.  Three hundred dollars! It's a pile!  But he'll never hear of it,

I'm thankful to say. The minute I've cleared it off, I'm safe; and I'll

never touch a card again.  Anyway, I won't while he lives, I make oath to

that. I'm entering on my last reform--I know it--yes, and I'll win; but

after that, if I ever slip again I'm gone."









CHAPTER 13



Tom Stares at Ruin



When I reflect upon the number of disagreeable people who I know have

gone to a better world, I am moved to lead a different life.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



October.  This is one of the peculiarly dangerous months to speculate in

stocks in.  The others are July, January, September, April, November,

May, March, June, December, August, and February.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Thus mournfully communing with himself, Tom moped along the lane past

Pudd'nhead Wilson's house, and still on and on between fences enclosing

vacant country on each hand till he neared the haunted house, then he

came moping back again, with many sighs and heavy with trouble. He sorely

wanted cheerful company.  Rowena!  His heart gave a bound at the thought,

but the next thought quieted it--the detested twins would be there.



He was on the inhabited side of Wilson's house, and now as he approached

it, he noticed that the sitting room was lighted. This would do; others

made him feel unwelcome sometimes, but Wilson never failed in courtesy

toward him, and a kindly courtesy does at least save one's feelings, even

if it is not professing to stand for a welcome. Wilson heard footsteps at

his threshold, then the clearing of a throat.



"It's that fickle-tempered, dissipated young goose--poor devil, he find

friends pretty scarce today, likely, after the disgrace of carrying a

personal assault case into a law-court."



A dejected knock.  "Come in!"



Tom entered, and dropped into a chair, without saying anything. Wilson

said kindly:



"Why, my boy, you look desolate.  Don't take it so hard. Try and forget

you have been kicked."



"Oh, dear," said Tom, wretchedly, "it's not that, Pudd'nhead--it's not

that.  It's a thousand times worse than that--oh, yes, a million times

worse."



"Why, Tom, what do you mean?  Has Rowena--"



"Flung me?  _No_, but the old man has."



Wilson said to himself, "Aha!" and thought of the mysterious girl in the

bedroom.  "The Driscolls have been making discoveries!" Then he said

aloud, gravely:



"Tom, there are some kinds of dissipation which--"



"Oh, shucks, this hasn't got anything to do with dissipation. He wanted

me to challenge that derned Italian savage, and I wouldn't do it."



"Yes, of course he would do that," said Wilson in a meditative

matter-of-course way, "but the thing that puzzled me was, why he didn't

look to that last night, for one thing, and why he let you carry such a

matter into a court of law at all, either before the duel or after it.

It's no place for it. It was not like him.  I couldn't understand it.

How did it happen?"



"It happened because he didn't know anything about it.  He was asleep

when I got home last night."



"And you didn't wake him?  Tom, is that possible?"



Tom was not getting much comfort here.  He fidgeted a moment, then said:



"I didn't choose to tell him--that's all.  He was going a-fishing before

dawn, with Pembroke Howard, and if I got the twins into the common

calaboose--and I thought sure I could--I never dreamed of their slipping

out on a paltry fine for such an outrageous offense--well, once in the

calaboose they would be disgraced, and uncle wouldn't want any duels with

that sort of characters, and wouldn't allow any.



"Tom, I am ashamed of you!  I don't see how you could treat your good old

uncle so.  I am a better friend of his than you are; for if I had known

the circumstances I would have kept that case out of court until I got

word to him and let him have the gentleman's chance."



"You would?" exclaimed Tom, with lively surprise.  "And it your first

case!  And you know perfectly well there never would have _been_ any case

if he had got that chance, don't you?  And you'd have finished your days

a pauper nobody, instead of being an actually launched and recognized

lawyer today.  And you would really have done that, would you?"



"Certainly."



Tom looked at him a moment or two, then shook his head sorrowfully and

said:



"I believe you--upon my word I do.  I don't know why I do, but I do.

Pudd'nhead Wilson, I think you're the biggest fool I ever saw."



"Thank you."



"Don't mention it."



"Well, he has been requiring you to fight the Italian, and you have

refused.  You degenerate remnant of an honorable line! I'm thoroughly

ashamed of you, Tom!"



"Oh, that's nothing!  I don't care for anything, now that the will's torn

up again."



"Tom, tell me squarely--didn't he find any fault with you for anything

but those two things--carrying the case into court and refusing to

fight?"



He watched the young fellow's face narrowly, but it was entirely

reposeful, and so also was the voice that answered:



"No, he didn't find any other fault with me.  If he had had any to find,

he would have begun yesterday, for he was just in the humor for it. He

drove that jack-pair around town and showed them the sights, and when he

came home he couldn't find his father's old silver watch that don't keep

time and he thinks so much of, and couldn't remember what he did with it

three or four days ago when he saw it last, and when I suggested that it

probably wasn't lost but stolen, it put him in a regular passion, and he

said I was a fool--which convinced me, without any trouble, that that

was just what he was afraid _had_ happened, himself, but did not want to

believe it, because lost things stand a better chance of being found

again than stolen ones."



"Whe-ew!" whistled Wilson.  "Score another one the list."



"Another what?"



"Another theft!"



"Theft?"



"Yes, theft.  That watch isn't lost, it's stolen.  There's been another

raid on the town--and just the same old mysterious sort of thing that has

happened once before, as you remember."



"You don't mean it!"



"It's as sure as you are born!  Have you missed anything yourself?"



"No.  That is, I did miss a silver pencil case that Aunt Mary Pratt gave

me last birthday--"



"You'll find it stolen--that's what you'll find."



"No, I sha'n't; for when I suggested theft about the watch and got such a

rap, I went and examined my room, and the pencil case was missing, but it

was only mislaid, and I found it again."



"You are sure you missed nothing else?"



"Well, nothing of consequence.  I missed a small plain gold ring worth

two or three dollars, but that will turn up.  I'll look again."



"In my opinion you'll not find it.  There's been a raid, I tell you. Come

_in!_"



Mr. Justice Robinson entered, followed by Buckstone and the town

constable, Jim Blake.  They sat down, and after some wandering and

aimless weather-conversation Wilson said:



"By the way, We've just added another to the list of thefts, maybe two.

Judge Driscoll's old silver watch is gone, and Tom here has missed a gold

ring."



"Well, it is a bad business," said the justice, "and gets worse the

further it goes.  The Hankses, the Dobsons, the Pilligrews, the Ortons,

the Grangers, the Hales, the Fullers, the Holcombs, in fact everybody

that lives around about Patsy Cooper's had been robbed of little things

like trinkets and teaspoons and suchlike small valuables that are easily

carried off.  It's perfectly plain that the thief took advantage of the

reception at Patsy Cooper's when all the neighbors were in her house and

all their niggers hanging around her fence for a look at the show, to

raid the vacant houses undisturbed. Patsy is miserable about it;

miserable on account of the neighbors, and particularly miserable on

account of her foreigners, of course; so miserable on their account that

she hasn't any room to worry about her own little losses."



"It's the same old raider," said Wilson.  "I suppose there isn't any

doubt about that."



"Constable Blake doesn't think so."



"No, you're wrong there," said Blake.  "The other times it was a man;

there was plenty of signs of that, as we know, in the profession, thought

we never got hands on him; but this time it's a woman."



Wilson thought of the mysterious girl straight off.  She was always in

his mind now.  But she failed him again.  Blake continued:



"She's a stoop-shouldered old woman with a covered basket on her arm, in

a black veil, dressed in mourning.  I saw her going aboard the ferryboat

yesterday.  Lives in Illinois, I reckon; but I don't care where she

lives, I'm going to get her--she can make herself sure of that."



"What makes you think she's the thief?"



"Well, there ain't any other, for one thing; and for another, some nigger

draymen that happened to be driving along saw her coming out of or going

into houses, and told me so--and it just happens that they was _robbed_,

every time."



It was granted that this was plenty good enough circumstantial evidence.

A pensive silence followed, which lasted some moments, then Wilson said:



"There's one good thing, anyway.  She can't either pawn or sell Count

Luigi's costly Indian dagger."



"My!" said Tom.  "Is _that_ gone?"



"Yes."



"Well, that was a haul!  But why can't she pawn it or sell it?"



"Because when the twins went home from the Sons of Liberty meeting last

night, news of the raid was sifting in from everywhere, and Aunt Patsy

was in distress to know if they had lost anything. They found that the

dagger was gone, and they notified the police and pawnbrokers everywhere.

It was a great haul, yes, but the old woman won't get anything out of it,

because she'll get caught."



"Did they offer a reward?" asked Buckstone.



"Yes, five hundred dollars for the knife, and five hundred more for the

thief."



"What a leather-headed idea!" exclaimed the constable. "The thief das'n't

go near them, nor send anybody. Whoever goes is going to get himself

nabbed, for their ain't any pawnbroker that's going to lose the chance

to--"



If anybody had noticed Tom's face at that time, the gray-green color of

it might have provoked curiosity; but nobody did. He said to himself:

"I'm gone!  I never can square up; the rest of the plunder won't pawn or

sell for half of the bill.  Oh, I know it--I'm gone, I'm gone--and this

time it's for good.  Oh, this is awful--I don't know what to do, nor

which way to turn!"



"Softly, softly," said Wilson to Blake.  "I planned their scheme for them

at midnight last night, and it was all finished up shipshape by two this

morning.  They'll get their dagger back, and then I'll explain to you how

the thing was done."



There were strong signs of a general curiosity, and Buckstone said:



"Well, you have whetted us up pretty sharp.  Wilson, and I'm free to say

that if you don't mind telling us in confidence--"



"Oh, I'd as soon tell as not, Buckstone, but as long as the twins and I

agreed to say nothing about it, we must let it stand so. But you can take

my word for it, you won't be kept waiting three days. Somebody will apply

for that reward pretty promptly, and I'll show you the thief and the

dagger both very soon afterward."



The constable was disappointed, and also perplexed.  He said:



"It may all be--yes, and I hope it will, but I'm blamed if I can see my

way through it.  It's too many for yours truly."



The subject seemed about talked out.  Nobody seemed to have anything

further to offer.  After a silence the justice of the peace informed

Wilson that he and Buckstone and the constable had come as a committee,

on the part of the Democratic party, to ask him to run for mayor--for the

little town was about to become a city and the first charter election was

approaching.  It was the first attention which Wilson had ever received

at the hands of any party; it was a sufficiently humble one, but it was a

recognition of his debut into the town's life and activities at last; it

was a step upward, and he was deeply gratified. He accepted, and the

committee departed, followed by young Tom.









CHAPTER 14



Roxana Insists Upon Reform



The true Southern watermelon is a boon apart, and not to be mentioned

with commoner things.  It is chief of this world's luxuries, king by the

grace of God over all the fruits of the earth. When one has tasted it, he

knows what the angels eat.  It was not a Southern watermelon that Eve

took:  we know it because she repented.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



About the time that Wilson was bowing the committee out, Pembroke Howard

was entering the next house to report. He found the old judge sitting

grim and straight in his chair, waiting.



"Well, Howard--the news?"



"The best in the world."



"Accepts, does he?"  and the light of battle gleamed joyously in the

Judge's eye.



"Accepts?  Why he jumped at it."



"Did, did he?  Now that's fine--that's very fine.  I like that. When is

it to be?"



"Now!  Straight off!  Tonight!  An admirable fellow--admirable!"



"Admirable?  He's a darling!  Why, it's an honor as well as a pleasure to

stand up before such a man.  Come--off with you! Go and arrange

everything--and give him my heartiest compliments. A rare fellow, indeed;

an admirable fellow, as you have said!"



"I'll have him in the vacant stretch between Wilson's and the haunted

house within the hour, and I'll bring my own pistols."



Judge Driscoll began to walk the floor in a state of pleased excitement;

but presently he stopped, and began to think--began to think of Tom.

Twice he moved toward the secretary, and twice he turned away again; but

finally he said:



"This may be my last night in the world--I must not take the chance. He

is worthless and unworthy, but it is largely my fault. He was entrusted

to me by my brother on his dying bed, and I have indulged him to his

hurt, instead of training him up severely, and making a man of him, I

have violated my trust, and I must not add the sin of desertion to that.

I have forgiven him once already, and would subject him to a long and

hard trial before forgiving him again, if I could live; but I must not

run that risk. No, I must restore the will.  But if I survive the duel, I

will hide it away, and he will not know, and I will not tell him until he

reforms, and I see that his reformation is going to be permanent."



He redrew the will, and his ostensible nephew was heir to a fortune

again.  As he was finishing his task, Tom, wearied with another brooding

tramp, entered the house and went tiptoeing past the sitting room door.

He glanced in, and hurried on, for the sight of his uncle was nothing but

terrors for him tonight.  But his uncle was writing!  That was unusual at

this late hour.  What could he be writing?  A chill of anxiety settled

down upon Tom's heart. Did that writing concern him?  He was afraid so.

He reflected that when ill luck begins, it does not come in sprinkles,

but in showers. He said he would get a glimpse of that document or know

the reason why. He heard someone coming, and stepped out of sight and

hearing. It was Pembroke Howard.  What could be hatching?



Howard said, with great satisfaction:



"Everything's right and ready.  He's gone to the battleground with his

second and the surgeon--also with his brother.  I've arranged it all with

Wilson--Wilson's his second.  We are to have three shots apiece."



"Good!  How is the moon?"



"Bright as day, nearly.  Perfect, for the distance--fifteen yards. No

wind--not a breath; hot and still."



"All good; all first-rate.  Here, Pembroke, read this, and witness it."



Pembroke read and witnessed the will, then gave the old man's hand a

hearty shake and said:



"Now that's right, York--but I knew you would do it.  You couldn't leave

that poor chap to fight along without means or profession, with certain

defeat before him, and I knew you wouldn't, for his father's sake if not

for his own."



"For his dead father's sake, I couldn't, I know; for poor Percy--but you

know what Percy was to me.  But mind--Tom is not to know of this unless I

fall tonight."



"I understand.  I'll keep the secret."



The judge put the will away, and the two started for the battleground. In

another minute the will was in Tom's hands. His misery vanished, his

feelings underwent a tremendous revulsion. He put the will carefully back

in its place, and spread his mouth and swung his hat once, twice, three

times around his head, in imitation of three rousing huzzahs, no sound

issuing from his lips. He fell to communing with himself excitedly and

joyously, but every now and then he let off another volley of dumb

hurrahs.



He said to himself:  "I've got the fortune again, but I'll not let on

that I know about it.  And this time I'm gong to hang on to it. I take no

more risks.  I'll gamble no more, I'll drink no more, because--well,

because I'll not go where there is any of that sort of thing going on,

again.  It's the sure way, and the only sure way; I might have thought of

that sooner--well, yes, if I had wanted to. But now--dear me, I've had a

scare this time, and I'll take no more chances.  Not a single chance

more. Land!  I persuaded myself this evening that I could fetch him

around without any great amount of effort, but I've been getting more and

more heavyhearted and doubtful straight along, ever since.  If he tells

me about this thing, all right; but if he doesn't, I sha'n't let on.

I--well, I'd like to tell Pudd'nhead Wilson, but--no, I'll think about

that; perhaps I won't." He whirled off another dead huzzah, and said,

"I'm reformed, and this time I'll stay so, sure!"



He was about to close with a final grand silent demonstration, when he

suddenly recollected that Wilson had put it out of his power to pawn or

sell the Indian knife, and that he was once more in awful peril of

exposure by his creditors for that reason. His joy collapsed utterly, and

he turned away and moped toward the door moaning and lamenting over the

bitterness of his luck. He dragged himself upstairs, and brooded in his

room a long time, disconsolate and forlorn, with Luigi's Indian knife for

a text. At last he sighed and said:



"When I supposed these stones were glass and this ivory bone, the thing

hadn't any interest for me because it hadn't any value, and couldn't help

me out of my trouble.  But now--why, now it is full of interest; yes, and

of a sort to break a body's heart. It's a bag of gold that has turned to

dirt and ashes in my hands. It could save me, and save me so easily, and

yet I've got to go to ruin. It's like drowning with a life preserver in

my reach.  All the hard luck comes to me, and all the good luck goes to

other people--Pudd'nhead Wilson, for instance; even his career has got a

sort of a little start at last, and what has he done to deserve it, I

should like to know?  Yes, he has opened his own road, but he isn't

content with that, but must block mine. It's a sordid, selfish world, and

I wish I was out of it." He allowed the light of the candle to play upon

the jewels of the sheath, but the flashings and sparklings had no charm

for his eye; they were only just so many pangs to his heart.  "I must not

say anything to Roxy about this thing," he said.  "She is too daring. She

would be for digging these stones out and selling them, and then--why,

she would be arrested and the stones traced, and then--" The thought made

him quake, and he hid the knife away, trembling all over and glancing

furtively about, like a criminal who fancies that the accuser is already

at hand.



Should he try to sleep?  Oh, no, sleep was not for him; his trouble was

too haunting, too afflicting for that.  He must have somebody to mourn

with.  He would carry his despair to Roxy.



He had heard several distant gunshots, but that sort of thing was not

uncommon, and they had made no impression upon him. He went out at the

back door, and turned westward.  He passed Wilson's house and proceeded

along the lane, and presently saw several figures approaching Wilson's

place through the vacant lots. These were the duelists returning from the

fight; he thought he recognized them, but as he had no desire for white

people's company, he stooped down behind the fence until they were out of

his way.



Roxy was feeling fine.  She said:



"Whah was you, child?  Warn't you in it?"



"In what?"



"In de duel."



"Duel?  Has there been a duel?"



"Co'se dey has.  De ole Jedge has be'n havin' a duel wid one o' dem

twins."



"Great Scott!"  Then he added to himself:  "That's what made him remake

the will; he thought he might get killed, and it softened him toward me.

And that's what he and Howard were so busy about. . . . Oh dear, if the

twin had only killed him, I should be out of my--"



"What is you mumblin' 'bout, Chambers?  Whah was you? Didn't you know dey

was gwine to be a duel?"



"No, I didn't.  The old man tried to get me to fight one with Count

Luigi, but he didn't succeed, so I reckon he concluded to patch up the

family honor himself."



He laughed at the idea, and went rambling on with a detailed account of

his talk with the judge, and how shocked and ashamed the judge was to

find that he had a coward in his family.  He glanced up at last, and got

a shock himself.  Roxana's bosom was heaving with suppressed passion, and

she was glowering down upon him with measureless contempt written in her

face.



"En you refuse' to fight a man dat kicked you, 'stid o' jumpin' at de

chance!  En you ain't got no mo' feelin' den to come en tell me, dat

fetched sich a po' lowdown ornery rabbit into de worl'!  Pah! it make me

sick!  It's de nigger in you, dat's what it is.  Thirty-one parts o' you

is white, en on'y one part nigger, en dat po' little one part is yo'

_soul_.  'Tain't wuth savin'; 'tain't wuth totin' out on a shovel en

throwin' en de gutter.  You has disgraced yo' birth.  What would yo' pa

think o' you?  It's enough to make him turn in his grave."



The last three sentences stung Tom into a fury, and he said to himself

that if his father were only alive and in reach of assassination his

mother would soon find that he had a very clear notion of the size of his

indebtedness to that man, and was willing to pay it up in full, and would

do it too, even at risk of his life; but he kept this thought to himself;

that was safest in his mother's present state.



"Whatever has come o' yo' Essex blood?  Dat's what I can't understan'.

En it ain't on'y jist Essex blood dat's in you, not by a long

sight--'deed it ain't!  My great-great-great-gran'father en yo'

great-great-great-great-gran'father was Ole Cap'n John Smith, de highest

blood dat Ole Virginny ever turned out, en _his_ great-great-gran'mother,

or somers along back dah, was Pocahontas de Injun queen, en her husbun'

was a nigger king outen Africa--en yit here you is, a slinkin' outen a

duel en disgracin' our whole line like a ornery lowdown hound!  Yes, it's

de nigger in you!"



She sat down on her candle box and fell into a reverie. Tom did not

disturb her; he sometimes lacked prudence, but it was not in

circumstances of this kind, Roxana's storm went gradually down, but it

died hard, and even when it seemed to be quite gone, it would now and

then break out in a distant rumble, so to speak, in the form of muttered

ejaculations.  One of these was, "Ain't nigger enough in him to show in

his fingernails, en dat takes mighty little--yit dey's enough to pain

his soul."



Presently she muttered.  "Yassir, enough to paint a whole thimbleful of

'em."  At last her ramblings ceased altogether, and her countenance began

to clear--a welcome sight to Tom, who had learned her moods, and knew she

was on the threshold of good humor now. He noticed that from time to time

she unconsciously carried her finger to the end of her nose.  He looked

closer and said:



"Why, Mammy, the end of your nose is skinned.  How did that come?"



She sent out the sort of wholehearted peal of laughter which God had

vouchsafed in its perfection to none but the happy angels in heaven and

the bruised and broken black slave on the earth, and said:



"Dad fetch dat duel, I be'n in it myself."



"Gracious! did a bullet to that?"



"Yassir, you bet it did!"



"Well, I declare!  Why, how did that happen?"



"Happened dis-away.  I 'uz a-sett'n' here kinder dozin' in de dark, en

_che-bang!_ goes a gun, right out dah.  I skips along out towards t'other

end o' de house to see what's gwine on, en stops by de ole winder on de

side towards Pudd'nhead Wilson's house dat ain't got no sash in it--but

dey ain't none of 'em got any sashes, for as dat's concerned--en I stood

dah in de dark en look out, en dar in the moonlight, right down under me

'uz one o' de twins a-cussin'--not much, but jist a-cussin' soft--it 'uz

de brown one dat 'uz cussin,' 'ca'se he 'uz hit in de shoulder.  En

Doctor Claypool he 'uz a-workin' at him, en Pudd'nhead Wilson he 'uz

a-he'pin', en ole Jedge Driscoll en Pem Howard 'uz a-standin' out yonder

a little piece waitin' for 'em to get ready agin.  En treckly dey squared

off en give de word, en _bang-bang_ went de pistols, en de twin he say,

'Ouch!'--hit him on de han' dis time--en I hear dat same bullet go

_spat!_ ag'in de logs under de winder; en de nex' time dey shoot, de twin

say, 'Ouch!' ag'in, en I done it too, 'ca'se de bullet glance' on his

cheekbone en skip up here en glance' on de side o' de winder en whiz

right acrost my face en tuck de hide off'n my nose--why, if I'd 'a'

be'n jist a inch or a inch en a half furder 't would 'a' tuck de whole

nose en disfiggered me.  Here's de bullet; I hunted her up."



"Did you stand there all the time?"



"Dat's a question to ask, ain't it!  What else would I do? Does I git a

chance to see a duel every day?"



"Why, you were right in range!  Weren't you afraid?"



The woman gave a sniff of scorn.



"'Fraid!  De Smith-Pocahontases ain't 'fraid o' nothin', let alone

bullets."



"They've got pluck enough, I suppose; what they lack is judgment. _I_

wouldn't have stood there."



"Nobody's accusin' you!"



"Did anybody else get hurt?"



"Yes, we all got hit 'cep' de blon' twin en de doctor en de seconds. De

Jedge didn't git hurt, but I hear Pudd'nhead say de bullet snip some o'

his ha'r off."



"'George!" said Tom to himself, "to come so near being out of my trouble,

and miss it by an inch.  Oh dear, dear, he will live to find me out and

sell me to some nigger trader yet--yes, and he would do it in a minute."

Then he said aloud, in a grave tone:



"Mother, we are in an awful fix."



Roxana caught her breath with a spasm, and said:



"Chile!  What you hit a body so sudden for, like dat? What's be'n en gone

en happen'?"



"Well, there's one thing I didn't tell you.  When I wouldn't fight, he

tore up the will again, and--"



Roxana's face turned a dead white, and she said:



"Now you's _done!_--done forever!  Dat's de end.  Bofe un us is gwine to

starve to--"



"Wait and hear me through, can't you!  I reckon that when he resolved to

fight, himself, he thought he might get killed and not have a chance to

forgive me any more in this life, so he made the will again, and I've

seen it, and it's all right.  But--"



"Oh, thank goodness, den we's safe ag'in!--safe! en so what did you want

to come here en talk sich dreadful--"



"Hold ON, I tell you, and let me finish.  The swag I gathered won't half

square me up, and the first thing we know, my creditors--well, you know

what'll happen."



Roxana dropped her chin, and told her son to leave her alone--she must

think this matter out.  Presently she said impressively:



"You got to go mighty keerful now, I tell you!  En here's what you got to

do.  He didn't git killed, en if you gives him de least reason, he'll

bust de will ag'in, en dat's de _las'_ time, now you hear me! So--you's

got to show him what you kin do in de nex' few days. You got to be pison

good, en let him see it; you got to do everything dat'll make him b'lieve

in you, en you got to sweeten aroun' ole Aunt Pratt, too--she's pow'ful

strong with de Jedge, en de bes' frien' you got. Nex', you'll go 'long

away to Sent Louis, en dat'll _keep_ him in yo' favor. Den you go en make

a bargain wid dem people.  You tell 'em he ain't gwine to live long--en

dat's de fac', too--en tell 'em you'll pay 'em intrust, en big intrust,

too--ten per--what you call it?"



"Ten percent a month?"



"Dat's it.  Den you take and sell yo' truck aroun', a little at a time,

en pay de intrust.  How long will it las'?"



"I think there's enough to pay the interest five or six months." "Den

you's all right.  If he don't die in six months, dat don't make no

diff'rence--Providence'll provide.  You's gwine to be safe--if you

behaves."  She bent an austere eye on him and added, "En you IS gwine to

behave--does you know dat?"



He laughed and said he was going to try, anyway.  She did not unbend. She

said gravely:



"Tryin' ain't de thing.  You's gwine to _do_ it.  You ain't gwine to

steal a pin--'ca'se it ain't safe no mo'; en you ain't gwine into no bad

comp'ny--not even once, you understand; en you ain't gwine to drink a

drop--nary a single drop; en you ain't gwine to gamble one single

gamble--not one!  Dis ain't what you's gwine to try to do, it's what

you's gwine to DO.  En I'll tell you how I knows it. Dis is how.  I's

gwine to foller along to Sent Louis my own self; en you's gwine to come

to me every day o' your life, en I'll look you over; en if you fails in

one single one o' dem things--jist _one_--I take my oath I'll come

straight down to dis town en tell de Jedge you's a nigger en a slave--en

_prove_ it!"  She paused to let her words sink home.  Then she added,

"Chambers, does you b'lieve me when I says dat?"



Tom was sober enough now.  There was no levity in his voice when he

answered:



"Yes, Mother, I know, now, that I am reformed--and permanently.

Permanently--and beyond the reach of any human temptation."



"Den g'long home en begin!"









CHAPTER 15



The Robber Robbed



Nothing so needs reforming as other people's habits.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Behold, the fool saith, "Put not all thine eggs in the one basket"

--which is but a manner of saying, "Scatter your money and your

attention"; but the wise man saith, "Put all your eggs in the one basket

and--_watch that basket!_"



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



What a time of it Dawson's Landing was having!  All its life it had been

asleep, but now it hardly got a chance for a nod, so swiftly did big

events and crashing surprises come along in one another's wake:  Friday

morning, first glimpse of Real Nobility, also grand reception at Aunt

Patsy Cooper's, also great robber raid; Friday evening, dramatic kicking

of the heir of the chief citizen in presence of four hundred people;

Saturday morning, emergence as practicing lawyer of the long-submerged

Pudd'nhead Wilson; Saturday night, duel between chief citizen and titled

stranger.



The people took more pride in the duel than in all the other events put

together, perhaps.  It was a glory to their town to have such a thing

happen there.  In their eyes the principals had reached the summit of

human honor.  Everybody paid homage to their names; their praises were in

all mouths.  Even the duelists' subordinates came in for a handsome share

of the public approbation: wherefore Pudd'nhead Wilson was suddenly

become a man of consequence. When asked to run for the mayoralty Saturday

night, he was risking defeat, but Sunday morning found him a made man and

his success assured.



The twins were prodigiously great now; the town took them to its bosom

with enthusiasm.  Day after day, and night after night, they went dining

and visiting from house to house, making friends, enlarging and

solidifying their popularity, and charming and surprising all with their

musical prodigies, and now and then heightening the effects with samples

of what they could do in other directions, out of their stock of rare and

curious accomplishments.  They were so pleased that they gave the

regulation thirty days' notice, the required preparation for citizenship,

and resolved to finish their days in this pleasant place.  That was the

climax. The delighted community rose as one man and applauded; and when

the twins were asked to stand for seats in the forthcoming aldermanic

board, and consented, the public contentment was rounded and complete.



Tom Driscoll was not happy over these things; they sunk deep, and hurt

all the way down.  He hated the one twin for kicking him, and the other

one for being the kicker's brother.



Now and then the people wondered why nothing was heard of the raider, or

of the stolen knife or the other plunder, but nobody was able to throw

any light on that matter.  Nearly a week had drifted by, and still the

thing remained a vexed mystery.



On Sunday Constable Blake and Pudd'nhead Wilson met on the street, and

Tom Driscoll joined them in time to open their conversation for them. He

said to Blake:  "You are not looking  well, Blake; you seem to be annoyed

about something.  Has anything gone wrong in the detective business?  I

believe you fairly and justifiably claim to have a pretty good reputation

in that line, isn't it so?"--which made Blake feel good, and look it;

but Tom added, "for a country detective"--which made Blake feel the other

way, and not only look it, but betray it in his voice.



"Yes, sir, I _have_ got a reputation; and it's as good as anybody's in

the profession, too, country or no country."



"Oh, I beg pardon; I didn't mean any offense.  What I started out to ask

was only about the old woman that raided the town--the stoop-shouldered

old woman, you know, that you said you were going to catch; and I knew

you would, too, because you have the reputation of never boasting,

and--well, you--you've caught the old woman?"



"Damn the old woman!"



"Why, sho! you don't mean to say you haven't caught her?"



"No, I haven't caught her.  If anybody could have caught her, I could;

but nobody couldn't, I don't care who he is."



I am sorry, real sorry--for your sake; because, when it gets around that

a detective has expressed himself confidently, and then--"



"Don't you worry, that's all--don't you worry; and as for the town, the

town needn't worry either.  She's my meat--make yourself easy about that.

I'm on her track; I've got clues that--"



"That's good!  Now if you could get an old veteran detective down from

St. Louis to help you find out what the clues mean, and where they lead

to, and then--"



"I'm plenty veteran enough myself, and I don't need anybody's help. I'll

have her inside of a we--inside of a month.  That I'll swear to!"



Tom said carelessly:



"I suppose that will answer--yes, that will answer.  But I reckon she is

pretty old, and old people don't often outlive the cautious pace of the

professional detective when he has got his clues together and is out on

his still-hunt."



Blake's dull face flushed under this gibe, but before he could set his

retort in order Tom had turned to Wilson, and was saying, with placid

indifference of manner and voice:



"Who got the reward, Pudd'nhead?"



Wilson winced slightly, and saw that his own turn was come.



"What reward?"



"Why, the reward for the thief, and the other one for the knife."



Wilson answered--and rather uncomfortably, to judge by his hesitating

fashion of delivering himself:



"Well, the--well, in face, nobody has claimed it yet."



Tom seemed surprised.



"Why, is that so?"



Wilson showed a trifle of irritation when he replied:



"Yes, it's so.  And what of it?"



"Oh, nothing.  Only I thought you had struck out a new idea, and invented

a scheme that was going to revolutionize the timeworn and ineffectual

methods of the--"  He stopped, and turned to Blake, who was happy now

that another had taken his place on the gridiron. "Blake, didn't you

understand him to intimate that it wouldn't be necessary for you to hunt

the old woman down?"



"'B'George, he said he'd have thief and swag both inside of three days

--he did, by hokey! and that's just about a week ago. Why, I said at the

time that no thief and no thief's pal was going to try to pawn or sell a

thing where he knowed the pawnbroker could get both rewards by taking HIM

into camp _with_ the swag. It was the blessedest idea that ever I

struck!"



"You'd change your mind," said Wilson, with irritated bluntness, "if you

knew the entire scheme instead of only part of it."



"Well," said the constable, pensively, "I had the idea that it wouldn't

work, and up to now I'm right anyway."



"Very well, then, let it stand at that, and give it a further show. It

has worked at least as well as your own methods, you perceive."



The constable hadn't anything handy to hit back with, so he discharged a

discontented sniff, and said nothing.



After the night that Wilson had partly revealed his scheme at his house,

Tom had tried for several days to guess out the secret of the rest of it,

but had failed.  Then it occurred to him to give Roxana's smarter head a

chance at it.  He made up a supposititious case, and laid it before

her.  She thought it over, and delivered her verdict upon it.  Tom said

to himself, "She's hit it, sure!"  He thought he would test that verdict

now, and watch Wilson's face; so he said reflectively:



"Wilson, you're not a fool--a fact of recent discovery. Whatever your

scheme was, it had sense in it, Blake's opinion to the contrary

notwithstanding.  I don't ask you to reveal it, but I will suppose a

case--a case which you will answer as a starting point for the real thing

I am going to come at, and that's all I want. You offered five hundred

dollars for the knife, and five hundred for the thief.  We will suppose,

for argument's sake, that the first reward is _advertised_ and the second

offered by _private letter_ to pawnbrokers and--"



Blake slapped his thigh, and cried out:



"By Jackson, he's got you, Pudd'nhead!  Now why couldn't I or _any_ fool

have thought of that?"



Wilson said to himself, "Anybody with a reasonably good head would have

thought of it.  I am not surprised that Blake didn't detect it; I am only

surprised that Tom did.  There is more to him than I supposed."  He said

nothing aloud, and Tom went on:



"Very well.  The thief would not suspect that there was a trap, and he

would bring or send the knife, and say he bought it for a song, or found

it in the road, or something like that, and try to collect the reward,

and be arrested--wouldn't he?"



"Yes," said Wilson.



"I think so," said Tom.  "There can't be any doubt of it. Have you ever

seen that knife?"



"No."



"Has any friend of yours?"



"Not that I know of."



"Well, I begin to think I understand why your scheme failed."



"What do you mean, Tom?  What are you driving at?" asked Wilson, with a

dawning sense of discomfort.



"Why, that there _isn't_ any such knife."



"Look here, Wilson," said Blake, "Tom Driscoll's right, for a thousand

dollars--if I had it."



Wilson's blood warmed a little, and he wondered if he had been played

upon by those strangers; it certainly had something of that look. But

what could they gain by it?  He threw out that suggestion. Tom replied:



"Gain?  Oh, nothing that you would value, maybe.  But they are strangers

making their way in a new community.  Is it nothing to them to appear as

pets of an Oriental prince--at no expense?  Is it nothing to them to be

able to dazzle this poor town with thousand-dollar rewards--at no

expense?  Wilson, there isn't any such knife, or your scheme would have

fetched it to light.  Or if there is any such knife, they've got it yet.

I believe, myself, that they've seen such a knife, for Angelo pictured it

out with his pencil too swiftly and handily for him to have been

inventing it, and of course I can't swear that they've never had it; but

this I'll go bail for--if they had it when they came to this town,

they've got it yet."



Blake said:



"It looks mighty reasonable, the way Tom puts it; it most certainly

does."



Tom responded, turning to leave:



"You find the old woman, Blake, and if she can't furnish the knife, go

and search the twins!"



Tom sauntered away.  Wilson felt a good deal depressed.  He hardly knew

what to think.  He was loath to withdraw his faith from the twins, and

was resolved not to do it on the present indecisive evidence; but--well,

he would think, and then decide how to act.



"Blake, what do you think of this matter?"



"Well, Pudd'nhead, I'm bound to say I put it up the way Tom does. They

hadn't the knife; or if they had it, they've got it yet."



The men parted.  Wilson said to himself:



"I believe they had it; if it had been stolen, the scheme would have

restored it, that is certain.  And so I believe they've got it."



Tom had no purpose in his mind when he encountered those two men. When he

began his talk he hoped to be able to gall them a little and get a trifle

of malicious entertainment out of it. But when he left, he left in great

spirits, for he perceived that just by pure luck and no troublesome labor

he had accomplished several delightful things:  he had touched both men

on a raw spot and seen them squirm; he had modified Wilson's sweetness

for the twins with one small bitter taste that he wouldn't be able to get

out of his mouth right away; and, best of all, he had taken the hated

twins down a peg with the community; for Blake would gossip around

freely, after the manner of detectives, and within a week the town would

be laughing at them in its sleeve for offering a gaudy reward for a

bauble which they either never possessed or hadn't lost. Tom was very

well satisfied with himself.



Tom's behavior at home had been perfect during the entire week. His uncle

and aunt had seen nothing like it before.  They could find no fault with

him anywhere.



Saturday evening he said to the Judge:



"I've had something preying on my mind, uncle, and as I am going away,

and might never see you again, I can't bear it any longer. I made you

believe I was afraid to fight that Italian adventurer. I had to get out

of it on some pretext or other, and maybe I chose badly, being taken

unawares, but no honorable person could consent to meet him in the field,

knowing what I knew about him."



"Indeed?  What was that?"



"Count Luigi is a confessed assassin."



"Incredible."



"It's perfectly true.  Wilson detected it in his hand, by palmistry, and

charged him with it, and cornered him up so close that he had to confess;

but both twins begged us on their knees to keep the secret, and swore

they would lead straight lives here; and it was all so pitiful that we

gave our word of honor never to expose them while they kept the promise.

You would have done it yourself, uncle."



"You are right, my boy; I would.  A man's secret is still his own

property, and sacred, when it has been surprised out of him like that.

You did well, and I am proud of you." Then he added mournfully, "But I

wish I could have been saved the shame of meeting an assassin on the

field on honor."



"It couldn't be helped, uncle.  If I had known you were going to

challenge him, I should have felt obliged to sacrifice my pledged word in

order to stop it, but Wilson couldn't be expected to do otherwise than

keep silent."



"Oh, no, Wilson did right, and is in no way to blame.  Tom, Tom, you have

lifted a heavy load from my heart; I was stung to the very soul when I

seemed to have discovered that I had a coward in my family."



"You may imagine what it cost ME to assume such a part, uncle."



"Oh, I know it, poor boy, I know it.  And I can understand how much it

has cost you to remain under that unjust stigma to this time. But it is

all right now, and no harm is done.  You have restored my comfort of

mind, and with it your own; and both of us had suffered enough."



The old man sat awhile plunged in thought; then he looked up with a

satisfied light in his eye, and said:  "That this assassin should have

put the affront upon me of letting me meet him on the field of honor as

if he were a gentleman is a matter which I will presently settle--but not

now.  I will not shoot him until after election. I see a way to ruin them

both before; I will attend to that first. Neither of them shall be

elected, that I promise. You are sure that the fact that he is an

assassin has not got abroad?"



"Perfectly certain of it, sir."



"It will be a good card.  I will fling a hint at it from the stump on the

polling day.  It will sweep the ground from under both of them."



"There's not a doubt of it.  It will finish them."



"That and outside work among the voters will, to a certainty. I want you

to come down here by and by and work privately among the rag-tag and

bobtail.  You shall spend money among them; I will furnish it."



Another point scored against the detested twins!  Really it was a great

day for Tom.  He was encouraged to chance a parting shot, now, at the

same target, and did it.



"You know that wonderful Indian knife that the twins have been making

such a to-do about?  Well, there's no track or trace of it yet; so the

town is beginning to sneer and gossip and laugh. Half the people believe

they never had any such knife, the other half believe they had it and

have got it still. I've heard twenty people talking like that today."



Yes, Tom's blemishless week had restored him to the favor of his aunt and

uncle.



His mother was satisfied with him, too.  Privately, she believed she was

coming to love him, but she did not say so.  She told him to go along to

St. Louis now, and she would get ready and follow. Then she smashed her

whisky bottle and said:



"Dah now!  I's a-gwine to make you walk as straight as a string,

Chambers, en so I's bown, you ain't gwine to git no bad example out o'

yo' mammy.  I tole you you couldn't go into no bad comp'ny. Well, you's

gwine into my comp'ny, en I's gwine to fill de bill. Now, den, trot

along, trot along!"



Tom went aboard one of the big transient boats that night with his heavy

satchel of miscellaneous plunder, and slept the sleep of the unjust,

which is serener and sounder than the other kind, as we know by the

hanging-eve history of a million rascals. But when he got up in the

morning, luck was against him again: a brother thief had robbed him while

he slept, and gone ashore at some intermediate landing.









CHAPTER 16



Sold Down the River



If you pick up a starving dog and make him prosperous, he will not bite

you.  This is the principal difference between a dog and a man.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



We all know about the habits of the ant, we know all about the habits of

the bee, but we know nothing at all about the habits of the oyster.  It

seems almost certain that we have been choosing the wrong time for

studying the oyster.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



When Roxana arrived, she found her son in such despair and misery that

her heart was touched and her motherhood rose up strong in her.  He was

ruined past hope now; his destruction would be immediate and sure, and he

would be an outcast and friendless. That was reason enough for a mother

to love a child; so she loved him, and told him so.  It made him wince,

secretly--for she was a "nigger."  That he was one himself was far from

reconciling him to that despised race.



Roxana poured out endearments upon him, to which he responded

uncomfortably, but as well as he could. And she tried to comfort him, but

that was not possible. These intimacies quickly became horrible to him,

and within the hour he began to try to get up courage enough to tell her

so, and require that they be discontinued or very considerably modified.

But he was afraid of her; and besides, there came a lull now, for she had

begun to think.  She was trying to invent a saving plan. Finally she

started up, and said she had found a way out.  Tom was almost suffocated

by the joy of this sudden good news.  Roxana said:



"Here is de plan, en she'll win, sure.  I's a nigger, en nobody ain't

gwine to doubt it dat hears me talk. I's wuth six hund'd dollahs.  Take

en sell me, en pay off dese gamblers."



Tom was dazed.  He was not sure he had heard aright. He was dumb for a

moment; then he said:



"Do you mean that you would be sold into slavery to save me?"



"Ain't you my chile?  En does you know anything dat a mother won't do for

her chile?  Day ain't nothin' a white mother won't do for her chile.  Who

made 'em so?  De Lord done it. En who made de niggers?  De Lord made 'em.

In de inside, mothers is all de same.  De good lord he made 'em so.  I's

gwine to be sole into slavery, en in a year you's gwine to buy yo' ole

mammy free ag'in. I'll show you how.  Dat's de plan."



Tom's hopes began to rise, and his spirits along with them.  He said:



"It's lovely of you, Mammy--it's just--"



"Say it ag'in!  En keep on sayin' it!  It's all de pay a body kin want in

dis worl', en it's mo' den enough. Laws bless you, honey, when I's slav'

aroun', en dey 'buses me, if I knows you's a-sayin' dat, 'way off yonder

somers, it'll heal up all de sore places, en I kin stan' 'em."



"I DO say it again, Mammy, and I'll keep on saying it, too. But how am I

going to sell you?  You're free, you know."



"Much diff'rence dat make!  White folks ain't partic'lar. De law kin sell

me now if dey tell me to leave de state in six months en I don't go.  You

draw up a paper--bill o' sale--en put it 'way off yonder, down in de

middle o' Kaintuck somers, en sign some names to it, en say you'll sell

me cheap 'ca'se you's hard up; you'll find you ain't gwine to have no

trouble. You take me up de country a piece, en sell me on a farm; dem

people ain't gwine to ask no questions if I's a bargain."



Tom forged a bill of sale and sold his mother to an Arkansas cotton

planter for a trifle over six hundred dollars. He did not want to commit

this treachery, but luck threw the man in his way, and this saved him the

necessity of going up-country to hunt up a purchaser, with the added risk

of having to answer a lot of questions, whereas this planter was so

pleased with Roxy that he asked next to none at all.  Besides, the

planter insisted that Roxy wouldn't know where she was, at first, and

that by the time she found out she would already have been contented.



So Tom argued with himself that it was an immense advantaged for Roxy to

have a master who was pleased with her, as this planter manifestly was.

In almost no time his flowing reasonings carried him to the point of even

half believing he was doing Roxy a splendid surreptitious service in

selling her "down the river." And then he kept diligently saying to

himself all the time: "It's for only a year.  In a year I buy her free

again; she'll keep that in mind, and it'll reconcile her."  Yes; the

little deception could do no harm, and everything would come out right

and pleasant in the end, anyway.  By agreement, the conversation in

Roxy's presence was all about the man's "up-country" farm, and how

pleasant a place it was, and how happy the slaves were there; so poor

Roxy was entirely deceived; and easily, for she was not dreaming that her

own son could be guilty of treason to a mother who, in voluntarily going

into slavery--slavery of any kind, mild or severe, or of any duration,

brief or long--was making a sacrifice for him compared with which death

would have been a poor and commonplace one.  She lavished tears and

loving caresses upon him privately, and then went away with her owner

--went away brokenhearted, and yet proud to do it.



Tom scored his accounts, and resolved to keep to the very letter of his

reform, and never to put that will in jeopardy again.  He had three

hundred dollars left.  According to his mother's plan, he was to put that

safely away, and add her half of his pension to it monthly.  In one year

this fund would buy her free again.



For a whole week he was not able to sleep well, so much the villainy

which he had played upon his trusting mother preyed upon his rag of

conscience; but after that he began to get comfortable again, and was

presently able to sleep like any other miscreant.



The boat bore Roxy away from St. Louis at four in the afternoon, and she

stood on the lower guard abaft the paddle box and watched Tom through a

blur of tears until he melted into the throng of people and disappeared;

then she looked no more, but sat there on a coil of cable crying till far

into the night. When she went to her foul steerage bunk at last, between

the clashing engines, it was not to sleep, but only to wait for the

morning, and, waiting, grieve.



It had been imagined that she "would not know," and would think she was

traveling upstream.  She!  Why, she had been steamboating for years.  At

dawn she got up and went listlessly and sat down on the cable coil again.

She passed many a snag whose "break" could have told her a thing to break

her heart, for it showed a current moving in the same direction that the

boat was going; but her thoughts were elsewhere, and she did not notice.

But at last the roar of a bigger and nearer break than usual brought her

out of her torpor, and she looked up, and her practiced eye fell upon

that telltale rush of water. For one moment her petrified gaze fixed

itself there. Then her head dropped upon her breast, and she said:



"Oh, de good Lord God have mercy on po' sinful me--I'S SOLE DOWN DE

RIVER!"









CHAPTER 17



The Judge Utters Dire Prophesy



Even popularity can be overdone.  In Rome, along at first, you are full

of regrets that Michelangelo died; but by and by, you only regret that

you didn't see him do it.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



JULY 4.  Statistics show that we lose more fools on this day than in all

the other days of the year put together. This proves, by the number left

in stock, that one Fourth of July per year is now inadequate, the country

has grown so.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



The summer weeks dragged by, and then the political campaign opened

--opened in pretty warm fashion, and waxed hotter and hotter daily. The

twins threw themselves into it with their whole heart, for their

self-love was engaged.  Their popularity, so general at first, had

suffered afterward; mainly because they had been TOO popular, and so a

natural reaction had followed. Besides, it had been diligently whispered

around that it was curious--indeed, VERY curious--that that wonderful

knife of theirs did not turn up--IF it was so valuable, or IF it had ever

existed. And with the whisperings went chucklings and nudgings and winks,

and such things have an effect.  The twins considered that success in the

election would reinstate them, and that defeat would work them

irreparable damage.  Therefore they worked hard, but not harder than

Judge Driscoll and Tom worked against them in the closing days of the

canvass.  Tom's conduct had remained so letter-perfect during two whole

months now, that his uncle not only trusted him with money with which to

persuade voters, but trusted him to go and get it himself out of the safe

in the private sitting room.



The closing speech of the campaign was made by Judge Driscoll, and he

made it against both of the foreigners.  It was disastrously effective.

He poured out rivers of ridicule upon them, and forced the big mass

meeting to laugh and applaud. He scoffed at them as adventures,

mountebanks, sideshow riffraff, dime museum freaks; he assailed their

showy titles with measureless derision; he said they were back-alley

barbers disguised as nobilities, peanut peddlers masquerading as

gentlemen, organ-grinders bereft of their brother monkey. At last he

stopped and stood still.  He waited until the place had become absolutely

silent and expectant, then he delivered his deadliest shot; delivered it

with ice-cold seriousness and deliberation, with a significant emphasis

upon the closing words: he said he believed that the reward offered for

the lost knife was humbug and bunkum, and that its owner would know where

to find it whenever he should have occasion TO ASSASSINATE SOMEBODY.



Then he stepped from the stand, leaving a startled and impressive hush

behind him instead of the customary explosion of cheers and party cries.



The strange remark flew far and wide over the town and made an

extraordinary sensation.  Everybody was asking, "What could he mean by

that?"  And everybody went on asking that question, but in vain; for the

judge only said he knew what he was talking about, and stopped there; Tom

said he hadn't any idea what his uncle meant, and Wilson, whenever he was

asked what he thought it meant, parried the question by asking the

questioner what HE thought it meant.



Wilson was elected, the twins were defeated--crushed, in fact, and left

forlorn and substantially friendless. Tom went back to St. Louis happy.



Dawson's Landing had a week of repose now, and it needed it. But it was

in an expectant state, for the air was full of rumors of a new duel.

Judge Driscoll's election labors had prostrated him, but it was said that

as soon as he was well enough to entertain a challenge he would get one

from Count Luigi.



The brothers withdrew entirely from society, and nursed their humiliation

in privacy.  They avoided the people, and went out for exercise only late

at night, when the streets were deserted.









CHAPTER 18



Roxana Commands



Gratitude and treachery are merely the two extremities of the same

procession.  You have seen all of it that is worth staying for when the

band and the gaudy officials have gone by.--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



THANKSGIVING DAY.  Let us all give humble, hearty, and sincere thanks

now, but the turkeys.  In the island of Fiji they do not use turkeys;

they use plumbers.  It does not become you and me to sneer at Fiji.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



The Friday after the election was a rainy one in St. Louis. It rained

all day long, and rained hard, apparently trying its best to wash that

soot-blackened town white, but of course not succeeding.  Toward midnight

Tom Driscoll arrived at his lodgings from the theater in the heavy

downpour, and closed his umbrella and let himself in; but when he would

have shut the door, he found that there was another person

entering--doubtless another lodger; this person closed the door and

tramped upstairs behind Tom. Tom found his door in the dark, and entered

it, and turned up the gas.  When he faced about, lightly whistling, he

saw the back of a man.  The man was closing and locking his door from

him. His whistle faded out and he felt uneasy.  The man turned around, a

wreck of shabby old clothes, sodden with rain and all a-drip, and showed

a black face under an old slouch hat.  Tom was frightened. He tried to

order the man out, but the words refused to come, and the other man got

the start.  He said, in a low voice:



"Keep still--I's yo' mother!"



Tom sunk in a heap on a chair, and gasped out:



"It was mean of me, and base--I know it; but I meant it for the best, I

did indeed--I can swear it."



Roxana stood awhile looking mutely down on him while he writhed in shame

and went on incoherently babbling self-accusations mixed with pitiful

attempts at explanation and palliation of his crime; then she seated

herself and took off her hat, and her unkept masses of long brown hair

tumbled down about her shoulders.



"It warn't no fault o' yo'n dat dat ain't gray," she said sadly, noticing

the hair.



"I know it, I know it!  I'm a scoundrel.  But I swear I meant it for the

best.  It was a mistake, of course, but I thought it was for the best, I

truly did."



Roxana began to cry softly, and presently words began to find their way

out between her sobs.  They were uttered lamentingly, rather than

angrily.



"Sell a pusson down de river--DOWN DE RIVER!--for de bes'! I wouldn't

treat a dog so!  I is all broke down en wore out now, en so I reckon

it ain't in me to storm aroun' no mo', like I used to when I 'uz trompled

on en 'bused.  I don't know--but maybe it's so.  Leastways, I's suffered

so much dat mournin' seem to come mo' handy to me now den stormin'."



These words should have touched Tom Driscoll, but if they did, that

effect was obliterated by a stronger one--one which removed the heavy

weight of fear which lay upon him, and gave his crushed spirit a most

grateful rebound, and filled all his small soul with a deep sense of

relief.  But he kept prudently still, and ventured no comment.  There was

a voiceless interval of some duration now, in which no sounds were heard

but the beating of the rain upon the panes, the sighing and complaining

of the winds, and now and then a muffled sob from Roxana. The sobs became

more and more infrequent, and at last ceased. Then the refugee began to

talk again.



"Shet down dat light a little.  More.  More yit.  A pusson dat is hunted

don't like de light.  Dah--dat'll do.  I kin see whah you is, en dat's

enough.  I's gwine to tell you de tale, en cut it jes as short as I kin,

en den I'll tell you what you's got to do. Dat man dat bought me ain't a

bad man; he's good enough, as planters goes; en if he could 'a' had his

way I'd 'a' be'n a house servant in his fambly en be'n comfortable:  but

his wife she was a Yank, en not right down good lookin', en she riz up

agin me straight off; so den dey sent me out to de quarter 'mongst de

common fiel' han's.  Dat woman warn't satisfied even wid dat, but she

worked up de overseer ag'in' me, she 'uz dat jealous en hateful; so de

overseer he had me out befo' day in de mawnin's en worked me de whole

long day as long as dey'uz any light to see by; en many's de lashin's I

got 'ca'se I couldn't come up to de work o' de stronges'.  Dat overseer

wuz a Yank too, outen New Englan', en anybody down South kin tell you

what dat mean. DEY knows how to work a nigger to death, en dey knows how

to whale 'em too--whale 'em till dey backs is welted like a washboard.

'Long at fust my marster say de good word for me to de overseer, but dat

'uz bad for me; for de mistis she fine it out, en arter dat I jist

ketched it at every turn--dey warn't no mercy for me no mo'."



Tom's heart was fired--with fury against the planter's wife; and he said

to himself, "But for that meddlesome fool, everything would have gone all

right."  He added a deep and bitter curse against her.



The expression of this sentiment was fiercely written in his face, and

stood thus revealed to Roxana by a white glare of lightning which turned

the somber dusk of the room into dazzling day at that moment.  She was

pleased--pleased and grateful; for did not that expression show that her

child was capable of grieving for his mother's wrongs and a feeling

resentment toward her persecutors?--a thing which she had been doubting.

But her flash of happiness was only a flash, and went out again and left

her spirit dark; for she said to herself, "He sole me down de river--he

can't feel for a body long; dis'll pass en go." Then she took up her tale

again.



"'Bout ten days ago I 'uz sayin' to myself dat I couldn't las' many mo'

weeks I 'uz so wore out wid de awful work en de lashin's, en so

downhearted en misable.  En I didn't care no mo', nuther--life warn't

wuth noth'n' to me, if I got to go on like dat.  Well, when a body is in

a frame o' mine like dat, what do a body care what a body do?  Dey was a

little sickly nigger wench 'bout ten year ole dat 'uz good to me, en

hadn't no mammy, po' thing, en I loved her en she loved me; en she come

out whah I 'uz workin' en she had a roasted tater, en tried to slip it to

me--robbin' herself, you see, 'ca'se she knowed de overseer didn't give

me enough to eat--en he ketched her at it, en giver her a lick acrost de

back wid his stick, which 'uz as thick as a broom handle, en she drop'

screamin' on de groun', en squirmin' en wallerin' aroun' in de dust like

a spider dat's got crippled. I couldn't stan' it.  All de hellfire dat

'uz ever in my heart flame' up, en I snatch de stick outen his han' en

laid him flat. He laid dah moanin' en cussin', en all out of his head,

you know, en de niggers 'uz plumb sk'yred to death.  Dey gathered roun'

him to he'p him, en I jumped on his hoss en took out for de river as

tight as I could go.  I knowed what dey would do wid me.  Soon as he got

well he would start in en work me to death if marster let him; en if dey

didn't do dat, they'd sell me furder down de river, en dat's de same

thing, so I 'lowed to drown myself en git out o' my troubles.  It 'uz

gitt'n' towards dark.  I 'uz at de river in two minutes.  Den I see a

canoe, en I says dey ain't no use to drown myself tell I got to; so I

ties de hoss in de edge o' de timber en shove out down de river, keepin'

in under de shelter o' de bluff bank en prayin' for de dark to shet down

quick. I had a pow'ful good start, 'ca'se de big house 'uz three mile

back f'om de river en on'y de work mules to ride dah on, en on'y niggers

ride 'em, en DEY warn't gwine to hurry--dey'd gimme all de chance dey

could.  Befo' a body could go to de house en back it would be long pas'

dark, en dey couldn't track de hoss en fine out which way I went tell

mawnin', en de niggers would tell 'em all de lies dey could 'bout it.



"Well, de dark come, en I went on a-spinnin' down de river. I paddled

mo'n two hours, den I warn't worried no mo', so I quit paddlin' en

floated down de current, considerin' what I 'uz gwine to do if I didn't

have to drown myself.  I made up some plans, en floated along, turnin'

'em over in my mine.  Well, when it 'uz a little pas' midnight, as I

reckoned, en I had come fifteen or twenty mile, I see de lights o' a

steamboat layin' at de bank, whah dey warn't no town en no woodyard, en

putty soon I ketched de shape o' de chimbly tops ag'in' de stars, en den

good gracious me, I 'most jumped out o' my skin for joy!  It 'uz de GRAN'

MOGUL--I 'uz chambermaid on her for eight seasons in de Cincinnati en

Orleans trade. I slid 'long pas'--don't see nobody stirrin' nowhah--hear

'em a-hammerin' away in de engine room, den I knowed what de matter

was--some o' de machinery's broke.  I got  asho' below de boat and turn'

de canoe loose, den I goes 'long up, en dey 'uz jes one plank out, en I

step' 'board de boat.  It 'uz pow'ful hot, deckhan's en roustabouts 'uz

sprawled aroun' asleep on de fo'cas'l', de second mate, Jim Bangs, he sot

dah on de bitts wid his head down, asleep--'ca'se dat's de way de second

mate stan' de cap'n's watch!--en de ole watchman, Billy Hatch, he 'uz

a-noddin' on de companionway;--en I knowed 'em all; en, lan', but dey did

look good!  I says to myself, I wished old marster'd come along NOW en

try to take me--bless yo' heart, I's 'mong frien's, I is.  So I tromped

right along 'mongst 'em, en went up on de b'iler deck en 'way back aft to

de ladies' cabin guard, en sot down dah in de same cheer dat I'd sot in

'mos' a hund'd million times, I reckon; en it 'uz jist home ag'in, I tell

you!



"In 'bout an hour I heard de ready bell jingle, en den de racket begin.

Putty soon I hear de gong strike.  'Set her back on de outside,' I says

to myself.  'I reckon I knows dat music!' I hear de gong ag'in.  'Come

ahead on de inside,' I says. Gong ag'in.  'Stop de outside.'  gong ag'in.

'Come ahead on de outside--now we's pinted for Sent Louis, en I's outer

de woods en ain't got to drown myself at all.'  I knowed de MOGUL 'uz in

de Sent Louis trade now, you see.  It 'uz jes fair daylight when we

passed our plantation, en I seed a gang o' niggers en white folks huntin'

up en down de sho', en troublin' deyselves a good deal 'bout me; but I

warn't troublin' myself none 'bout dem.



"'Bout dat time Sally Jackson, dat used to be my second chambermaid en

'uz head chambermaid now, she come out on de guard, en 'uz pow'ful glad

to see me, en so 'uz all de officers; en I tole 'em I'd got kidnapped en

sole down de river, en dey made me up twenty dollahs en give it to me, en

Sally she rigged me out wid good clo'es, en when I got here I went

straight to whah you used to wuz, en den I come to dis house, en dey say

you's away but 'spected back every day; so I didn't dast to go down de

river to Dawson's, 'ca'se I might miss you.



"Well, las' Monday I 'uz pass'n by one o' dem places in fourth street

whah deh sticks up runaway nigger bills, en he'ps to ketch 'em, en I seed

my marster!  I 'mos' flopped down on de groun', I felt so gone.  He had

his back to me, en 'uz talkin' to de man en givin' him some bills--nigger

bills, I reckon, en I's de nigger.  He's offerin' a reward--dat's it.

Ain't I right, don't you reckon?"



Tom had been gradually sinking into a state of ghastly terror, and he

said to himself, now:  "I'm lost, no matter what turn things take!  This

man has said to me that he thinks there was something suspicious about

that sale; he said he had a letter from a passenger on the GRAND MOGUL

saying that Roxy came here on that boat and that everybody on board knew

all about the case; so he says that her coming here instead of flying to

a free state looks bad for me, and that if I don't find her for him, and

that pretty soon, he will make trouble for me.  I never believed that

story; I couldn't believe she would be so dead to all motherly instincts

as to come here, knowing the risk she would run of getting me into

irremediable trouble.  And after all, here she is!  And I stupidly swore

I would help find her, thinking it was a perfectly safe thing to promise.

If I venture to deliver her up, she--she--but how can I help myself?

I've got to do that or pay the money, and where's the money to come from?

I--I--well, I should think that if he would swear to treat her kindly

hereafter--and she says, herself, that he is a good man--and if he would

swear to never allow her to be overworked, or ill fed, or--"



A flash of lightning exposed Tom's pallid face, drawn and rigid with

these worrying thoughts.  Roxana spoke up sharply now, and there was

apprehension in her voice.



"Turn up dat light!  I want to see yo' face better.  Dah now--lemme look

at you.  Chambers, you's as white as yo' shirt! Has you see dat man?  Has

he be'n to see you?"



"Ye-s."



"When?"



"Monday noon."



"Monday noon!  Was he on my track?"



"He--well, he thought he was.  That is, he hoped he was. This is the bill

you saw."  He took it out of his pocket.



"Read it to me!"



She was panting with excitement, and there was a dusky glow in her eyes

that Tom could not translate with certainty, but there seemed to be

something threatening about it. The handbill had the usual rude woodcut

of a turbaned Negro woman running, with the customary bundle on a stick

over her shoulder, and the heading in bold type, "$100 REWARD."  Tom read

the bill aloud--at least the part that described Roxana and named the

master and his St. Louis address and the address of the Fourth street

agency; but he left out the item that applicants for the reward might

also apply to Mr. Thomas Driscoll.



"Gimme de bill!"



Tom had folded it and was putting it in his pocket. He felt a chilly

streak creeping down his back, but said as carelessly as he could:



"The bill?  Why, it isn't any use to you, you can't read it. What do you

want with it?"



"Gimme de bill!"  Tom gave it to her, but with a reluctance which he

could not entirely disguise.  "Did you read it ALL to me?"



"Certainly I did."



"Hole up yo' han' en swah to it."



Tom did it.  Roxana put the bill carefully away in her pocket, with her

eyes fixed upon Tom's face all the while; then she said:



"Yo's lyin'!"



"What would I want to lie about it for?"



"I don't know--but you is.  Dat's my opinion, anyways. But nemmine 'bout

dat.  When I seed dat man I 'uz dat sk'yerd dat I could sca'cely wobble

home.  Den I give a nigger man a dollar for dese clo'es, en I ain't be'in

in a house sence, night ner day, till now. I blacked my face en laid hid

in de cellar of a ole house dat's burnt down, daytimes, en robbed de

sugar hogsheads en grain sacks on de wharf, nights, to git somethin' to

eat, en never dast to try to buy noth'n', en I's 'mos' starved. En I

never dast to come near dis place till dis rainy night, when dey ain't no

people roun' sca'cely.  But tonight I be'n a-stanin' in de dark alley

ever sence night come, waitin' for you to go by. En here I is."



She fell to thinking.  Presently she said:



"You seed dat man at noon, las' Monday?"



"Yes."



"I seed him de middle o' dat arternoon.  He hunted you up, didn't he?"



"Yes."



"Did he give you de bill dat time?"



"No, he hadn't got it printed yet."



Roxana darted a suspicious glance at him.



"Did you he'p him fix up de bill?"



Tom cursed himself for making that stupid blunder, and tried to rectify

it by saying he remember now that it WAS at noon Monday that the man gave

him the bill.  Roxana said:



"You's lyin' ag'in, sho."  Then she straightened up and raised her

finger:



"Now den!  I's gwine to ask you a question, en I wants to know how you's

gwine to git aroun' it.  You knowed he 'uz arter me; en if you run off,

'stid o' stayin' here to he'p him, he'd know dey 'uz somethin' wrong

'bout dis business, en den he would inquire 'bout you, en dat would take

him to yo' uncle, en yo' uncle would read de bill en see dat you be'n

sellin' a free nigger down de river, en you know HIM, I reckon!  He'd

t'ar up de will en kick you outen de house.  Now, den, you answer me dis

question:  hain't you tole dat man dat I would be sho' to come here, en

den you would fix it so he could set a trap en ketch me?"



Tom recognized that neither lies nor arguments could help him any

longer--he was in a vise, with the screw turned on, and out of it there

was no budging.  His face began to take on an ugly look, and presently he

said, with a snarl:



"Well, what could I do?  You see, yourself, that I was in his grip and

couldn't get out."



Roxy scorched him with a scornful gaze awhile, then she said:



"What could you do?  You could be Judas to yo' own mother to save yo'

wuthless hide!  Would anybody b'lieve it? No--a dog couldn't!  You is de

lowdownest orneriest hound dat was ever pup'd into dis worl'--en I's

'sponsible for it!"--and she spat on him.



He made no effort to resent this.  Roxy reflected a moment, then she

said:



"Now I'll tell you what you's gwine to do.  You's gwine to give dat man

de money dat you's got laid up, en make him wait till you kin go to de

judge en git de res' en buy me free agin."



"Thunder!  What are you thinking of?  Go and ask him for three hundred

dollars and odd?  What would I tell him I want it for, pray?"



Roxy's answer was delivered in a serene and level voice.



"You'll tell him you's sole me to pay yo' gamblin' debts en dat you lied

to me en was a villain, en dat I 'quires you to git dat money en buy me

back ag'in."



"Why, you've gone stark mad!  He would tear the will to shreds in a

minute--don't you know that?"



"Yes, I does."



"Then you don't believe I'm idiot enough to go to him, do you?"



"I don't b'lieve nothin' 'bout it--I KNOWS you's a-goin'. I knows it

'ca'se you knows dat if you don't raise dat money I'll go to him myself,

en den he'll sell YOU down de river, en you kin see how you like it!"



Tom rose, trembling and excited, and there was an evil light in his eye.

He strode to the door and said he must get out of this suffocating place

for a moment and clear his brain in the fresh air so that he could

determine what to do. The door wouldn't open.  Roxy smiled grimly, and

said:



"I's got the key, honey--set down.  You needn't cle'r up yo' brain none

to fine out what you gwine to do--_I_ knows what you's gwine to do."  Tom

sat down and began to pass his hands through his hair with a helpless and

desperate air. Roxy said, "Is dat man in dis house?"



Tom glanced up with a surprised expression, and asked:



"What gave you such an idea?"



"You done it.  Gwine out to cle'r yo' brain!  In de fust place you ain't

got none to cle'r, en in de second place yo' ornery eye tole on you.

You's de lowdownest hound dat ever--but I done told you dat befo'.  Now

den, dis is Friday. You kin fix it up wid dat man, en tell him you's

gwine away to git de res' o' de money, en dat you'll be back wid it nex'

Tuesday, or maybe Wednesday. You understan'?"



Tom answered sullenly:  "Yes."



"En when you gits de new bill o' sale dat sells me to my own self, take

en send it in de mail to Mr. Pudd'nhead Wilson, en write on de back dat

he's to keep it tell I come.  You understan'?"



"Yes."



"Dat's all den.  Take yo' umbreller, en put on yo' hat."



"Why?"



"Beca'se you's gwine to see me home to de wharf.  You see dis knife? I's

toted it aroun' sence de day I seed dat man en bought dese clo'es en it.

If he ketch me, I's gwine to kill myself wid it.  Now start along, en go

sof', en lead de way; en if you gives a sign in dis house, or if anybody

comes up to you in de street, I's gwine to jam it right into you.

Chambers, does you b'lieve me when I says dat?"



"It's no use to bother me with that question.  I know your word's good."



"Yes, it's diff'rent from yo'n!  Shet de light out en move along--here's

de key."



They were not followed.  Tom trembled every time a late straggler brushed

by them on the street, and half expected to feel the cold steel in his

back.  Roxy was right at his heels and always in reach.  After tramping a

mile they reached a wide vacancy on the deserted wharves, and in this

dark and rainy desert they parted.



As Tom trudged home his mind was full of dreary thoughts and wild plans;

but at last he said to himself, wearily:



"There is but the one way out.  I must follow her plan. But with a

variation--I will not ask for the money and ruin myself; I will ROB the

old skinflint."









CHAPTER 19



The Prophesy Realized



Few things are harder to put up with than the annoyance of a good

example.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



It were not best that we should all think alike; it is difference of

opinion that makes horse races.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Dawson's Landing was comfortably finishing its season of dull repose and

waiting patiently for the duel. Count Luigi was waiting, too; but not

patiently, rumor said. Sunday came, and Luigi insisted on having his

challenge conveyed. Wilson carried it.  Judge Driscoll declined to fight

with an assassin--"that is," he added significantly, "in the field of

honor."



Elsewhere, of course, he would be ready.  Wilson tried to convince him

that if he had been present himself when Angelo told him about the

homicide committed by Luigi, he would not have considered the act

discreditable to Luigi; but the obstinate old man was not to be moved.



Wilson went back to his principal and reported the failure of his

mission.  Luigi was incensed, and asked how it could be that the old

gentleman, who was by no means dull-witted, held his trifling nephew's

evidence in inferences to be of more value than Wilson's. But Wilson

laughed, and said:



"That is quite simple; that is easily explicable. I am not his doll--his

baby--his infatuation:  his nature is. The judge and his late wife never

had any children. The judge and his wife were past middle age when this

treasure fell into their lap.  One must make allowances for a parental

instinct that has been starving for twenty-five or thirty years. It is

famished, it is crazed with hunger by that time, and will be entirely

satisfied with anything that comes handy; its taste is atrophied, it

can't tell mud cat from shad.  A devil born to a young couple is

measurably recognizable by them as a devil before long, but a devil

adopted by an old couple is an angel to them, and remains so, through

thick and thin.  Tom is this old man's angel; he is infatuated with him.

Tom can persuade him into things which other people can't--not all

things; I don't mean that, but a good many--particularly one class of

things:  the things that create or abolish personal partialities or

prejudices in the old man's mind.  The old man liked both of you.  Tom

conceived a hatred for you.  That was enough; it turned the old man

around at once. The oldest and strongest friendship must go to the ground

when one of these late-adopted darlings throws a brick at it."



"It's a curious philosophy," said Luigi.



"It ain't philosophy at all--it's a fact.  And there is something

pathetic and beautiful about it, too.  I think there is nothing more

pathetic than to see one of these poor old childless couples taking a

menagerie of yelping little worthless dogs to their hearts; and then

adding some cursing and squawking parrots and a jackass-voiced macaw; and

next a couple of hundred screeching songbirds, and presently some fetid

guinea pigs and rabbits, and a howling colony of cats.  It is all a

groping and ignorant effort to construct out of base metal and brass

filings, so to speak, something to take the place of that golden treasure

denied them by Nature, a child.  But this is a digression. The unwritten

law of this region requires you to kill Judge Driscoll on sight, and he

and the community will expect that attention at your hands--though of

course your own death by his bullet will answer every purpose.  Look out

for him!  Are you healed--that is, fixed?"



"Yes, he shall have his opportunity.  If he attacks me, I will respond."



As Wilson was leaving, he said:



"The judge is still a little used up by his campaign work, and will not

get out for a day or so; but when he does get out, you want to be on the

alert."



About eleven at night the twins went out for exercise, and started on a

long stroll in the veiled moonlight.



Tom Driscoll had landed at Hackett's Store, two miles below Dawson's,

just about half an hour earlier, the only passenger for that lonely spot,

and had walked up the shore road and entered Judge Driscoll's house

without having encountered anyone either on the road or under the roof.



He pulled down his window blinds and lighted his candle. He laid off his

coat and hat and began his preparations. He unlocked his trunk and got

his suit of girl's clothes out from under the male attire in it, and laid

it by.  Then he blacked his face with burnt cork and put the cork in his

pocket. His plan was to slip down to his uncle's private sitting room

below, pass into the bedroom, steal the safe key from the old gentleman's

clothes, and then go back and rob the safe.  He took up his candle to

start.  His courage and confidence were high, up to this point, but both

began to waver a little now. Suppose he should make a noise, by some

accident, and get caught--say, in the act of opening the safe?  Perhaps

it would be well to go armed. He took the Indian knife from its hiding

place, and felt a pleasant return of his wandering courage.  He slipped

stealthily down the narrow stair, his hair rising and his pulses halting

at the slightest creak.  When he was halfway down, he was disturbed to

perceive that the landing below was touched by a faint glow of light.

What could that mean?  Was his uncle still up? No, that was not likely;

he must have left his night taper there when he went to bed.  Tom crept

on down, pausing at every step to listen. He found the door standing

open, and glanced it. What he saw pleased him beyond measure.  His uncle

was asleep on the sofa; on a small table at the head of the sofa a lamp

was burning low, and by it stood the old man's small cashbox, closed.

Near the box was a pile of bank notes and a piece of paper covered with

figured in pencil.  The safe door was not open. Evidently the sleeper had

wearied himself with work upon his finances, and was taking a rest.



Tom set his candle on the stairs, and began to make his way toward the

pile of notes, stooping low as he went. When he was passing his uncle,

the old man stirred in his sleep, and Tom stopped instantly--stopped, and

softly drew the knife from its sheath, with his heart thumping, and his

eyes fastened upon his benefactor's face.  After a moment or two he

ventured forward again--one step--reached for his prize and seized it,

dropping the knife sheath.  Then he felt the old man's strong grip upon

him, and a wild cry of "Help! help!" rang in his ear. Without hesitation

he drove the knife home--and was free. Some of the notes escaped from his

left hand and fell in the blood on the floor.  He dropped the knife and

snatched them up and started to fly; transferred them to his left hand,

and seized the knife again, in his fright and confusion, but remembered

himself and flung it from him, as being a dangerous witness to carry away

with him.



He jumped for the stair-foot, and closed the door behind him; and as he

snatched his candle and fled upward, the stillness of the night was

broken by the sound of urgent footsteps approaching the house. In another

moment he was in his room, and the twins were standing aghast over the

body of the murdered man!



Tom put on his coat, buttoned his hat under it, threw on his suit of

girl's clothes, dropped the veil, blew out his light, locked the room

door by which he had just entered, taking the key, passed through his

other door into the black hall, locked that door and kept the key, then

worked his way along in the dark and descended the black stairs.  He was

not expecting to meet anybody, for all interest was centered in the other

part of the house now; his calculation proved correct.  By the time he

was passing through the backyard, Mrs. Pratt, her servants, and a dozen

half-dressed neighbors had joined the twins and the dead, and accessions

were still arriving at the front door.



As Tom, quaking as with a palsy, passed out at the gate, three women came

flying from the house on the opposite side of the lane. They rushed by

him and in at the gate, asking him what the trouble was there, but not

waiting for an answer. Tom said to himself, "Those old maids waited to

dress--they did the same thing the night Stevens's house burned down next

door." In a few minutes he was in the haunted house.  He lighted a candle

and took off his girl-clothes.  There was blood on him all down his left

side, and his right hand was red with the stains of the blood-soaked

notes which he has crushed in it; but otherwise he was free from this

sort of evidence.  He cleansed his hand on the straw, and cleaned most of

the smut from his face.  Then he burned the male and female attire to

ashes, scattered the ashes, and put on a disguise proper for a tramp.  He

blew out his light, went below, and was soon loafing down the river road

with the intent to borrow and use one of Roxy's devices.  He found a

canoe and paddled down downstream, setting the canoe adrift as dawn

approached, and making his way by land to the next village, where he kept

out of sight till a transient steamer came along, and then took deck

passage for St. Louis.  He was ill at ease Dawson's Landing was behind

him; then he said to himself, "All the detectives on earth couldn't trace

me now; there's not a vestige of a clue left in the world; that homicide

will take its place with the permanent mysteries, and people won't get

done trying to guess out the secret of it for fifty years."



In St. Louis, next morning, he read this brief telegram in the

papers--dated at Dawson's Landing:



     Judge Driscoll, an old and respected citizen, was assassinated

     here about midnight by a profligate Italian nobleman or a

     barber on account of a quarrel growing out of the recent

     election. The assassin will probably be lynched.



"One of the twins!" soliloquized Tom.  "How lucky! It is the knife that

has done him this grace.  We never know when fortune is trying to favor

us.  I actually cursed Pudd'nhead Wilson in my heart for putting it out

of my power to sell that knife. I take it back now."



Tom was now rich and independent.  He arranged with the planter, and

mailed to Wilson the new bill of sale which sold Roxana to herself; then

he telegraphed his Aunt Pratt:



     Have seen the awful news in the papers and am almost

     prostrated with grief.  Shall start by packet today. Try to

     bear up till I come.



When Wilson reached the house of mourning and had gathered such details

as Mrs. Pratt and the rest of the crowd could tell him, he took command

as mayor, and gave orthat nothing should be touched, but everything

left as it was until Justice Robinson should arrive and take the proper

measures as coroner. He cleared everybody out of the room but the twins

and himself. The sheriff soon arrived and took the twins away to jail.

Wilson told them to keep heart, and promised to do it best in their

defense when the case should come to trial.  Justice Robinson came

presently, and with him Constable Blake.  They examined the room

thoroughly.  They found the knife and the sheath. Wilson noticed that

there were fingerprints on the knife's handle. That pleased him, for the

twins had required the earliest comers to make a scrutiny of their hands

and clothes, and neither these people nor Wilson himself had found any

bloodstains upon them. Could there be a possibility that the twins had

spoken the truth when they had said they found the man dead when they ran

into the house in answer to the cry for help?  He thought of that

mysterious girl at once.  But this was not the sort of work for a girl to

be engaged in.  No matter; Tom Driscoll's room must be examined.



After the coroner's jury had viewed the body and its surroundings, Wilson

suggested a search upstairs, and he went along. The jury forced an

entrance to Tom's room, but found nothing, of course.



The coroner's jury found that the homicide was committed by Luigi, and

that Angelo was accessory to it.



The town was bitter against he misfortunates, and for the first few days

after the murder they were in constant danger of being lynched.  The

grand jury presently indicted Luigi for murder in the first degree, and

Angelo as accessory before the fact. The twins were transferred from the

city jail to the county prison to await trial.



Wilson examined the finger marks on the knife handle and said to himself,

"Neither of the twins made those marks.  Then manifestly there was

another person concerned, either in his own interest or as hired

assassin."



But who could it be?  That, he must try to find out. The safe was not

opened, the cashbox was closed, and had three thousand dollars in it.

Then robbery was not the motive, and revenge was.  Where had the murdered

man an enemy except Luigi? There was but that one person in the world

with a deep grudge against him.



The mysterious girl!  The girl was a great trial to Wilson. If the motive

had been robbery, the girl might answer; but there wasn't any girl that

would want to take this old man's life for revenge. He had no quarrels

with girls; he was a gentleman.



Wilson had perfect tracings of the finger marks of the knife handle; and

among his glass records he had a great array of fingerprints of women and

girls, collected during the last fifteen or eighteen years, but he

scanned them in vain, they successfully withstood every test; among them

were no duplicates of the prints on the knife.



The presence of the knife on the stage of the murder was a worrying

circumstance for Wilson.  A week previously he had as good as admitted to

himself that he believed Luigi had possessed such a knife, and that he

still possessed it notwithstanding his pretense that it had been stolen.

And now here was the knife, and with it the twins.  Half the town had

said the twins were humbugging when they claimed they had lost their

knife, and now these people were joyful, and said, "I told you so!"



If their fingerprints had been on the handle--but useless to bother any

further about that; the fingerprints on the handle were NOT theirs--that

he knew perfectly.



Wilson refused to suspect Tom; for first, Tom couldn't murder anybody--he

hadn't character enough; secondly, if he could murder a person he

wouldn't select his doting benefactor and nearest relative; thirdly,

self-interest was in the way; for while the uncle lived, Tom was sure of

a free support and a chance to get the destroyed will revived again, but

with the uncle gone, that chance was gone too.  It was true the will had

really been revived, as was now discovered, but Tom could not have been

aware of it, or he would have spoken of it, in his native talky,

unsecretive way.  Finally, Tom was in St. Louis when the murder was done,

and got the news out of the morning journals, as was shown by his

telegram to his aunt. These speculations were unemphasized sensations

rather than articulated thoughts, for Wilson would have laughed at the

idea of seriously connecting Tom with the murder.



Wilson regarded the case of the twins as desperate--in fact, about

hopeless.  For he argued that if a confederate was not found, an

enlightened Missouri jury would hang them; sure; if a confederate was

found, that would not improve the matter, but simply furnish one more

person for the sheriff to hang. Nothing could save the twins but the

discovery of a person who did the murder on his sole personal account--an

undertaking which had all the aspect of the impossible.  Still, the

person who made the fingerprints must be sought.  The twins might have no

case WITH them, but they certainly would have none without him.



So Wilson mooned around, thinking, thinking, guessing, guessing, day and

night, and arriving nowhere.  Whenever he ran across a girl or a woman he

was not acquainted with, he got her fingerprints, on one pretext or

another; and they always cost him a sigh when he got home, for they never

tallied with the finger marks on the knife handle.



As to the mysterious girl, Tom swore he knew no such girl, and did not

remember ever seeing a girl wearing a dress like the one described by

Wilson.  He admitted that he did not always lock his room, and that

sometimes the servants forgot to lock the house doors; still, in his

opinion the girl must have made but few visits or she would have been

discovered.  When Wilson tried to connect her with the stealing raid, and

thought she might have been the old woman's confederate, if not the very

thief disguised as an old woman, Tom seemed stuck, and also much

interested, and said he would keep a sharp eye out for this person or

persons, although he was afraid that she or they would be too smart to

venture again into a town where everybody would now be on the watch for a

good while to come.



Everybody was pitying Tom, he looked so quiet and sorrowful, and seemed

to feel his great loss so deeply.  He was playing a part, but it was not

all a part.  The picture of his alleged uncle, as he had last seen him,

was before him in the dark pretty frequently, when he was away, and

called again in his dreams, when he was asleep.  He wouldn't go into the

room where the tragedy had happened.  This charmed the doting Mrs. Pratt,

who realized now, "as she had never done before," she said, what a

sensitive and delicate nature her darling had, and how he adored his poor

uncle.









CHAPTER 20



The Murderer Chuckles



Even the clearest and most perfect circumstantial evidence is likely to

be at fault, after all, and therefore ought to be received with great

caution.  Take the case of any pencil, sharpened by any woman; if you

have witnesses, you will find she did it with a knife; but if you take

simply the aspect of the pencil, you will say she did it with her teeth.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



The weeks dragged along, no friend visiting the jailed twins but their

counsel and Aunt Patsy Cooper, and the day of trial came at last--the

heaviest day in Wilson's life; for with all his tireless diligence he had

discovered no sign or trace of the missing confederate.  "Confederate"

was the term he had long ago privately accepted for that person--not as

being unquestionably the right term, but as being the least possibly the

right one, though he was never able to understand why the twins did not

vanish and escape, as the confederate had done, instead of remaining by

the murdered man and getting caught there.



The courthouse was crowded, of course, and would remain so to the finish,

for not only in the town itself, but in the country for miles around, the

trial was the one topic of conversation among the people.  Mrs. Pratt, in

deep mourning, and Tom with a weed on his hat, had seats near Pembroke

Howard, the public prosecutor, and back of them sat a great array of

friends of the family.  The twins had but one friend present to keep

their counsel in countenance, their poor old sorrowing landlady. She sat

near Wilson, and looked her friendliest.  In the "nigger corner" sat

Chambers; also Roxy, with good clothes on, and her bill of sale in her

pocket.  It was her most precious possession, and she never parted with

it, day or night.  Tom had allowed her thirty-five dollars a month ever

since he came into his property, and had said that he and she ought to be

grateful to the twins for making them rich; but had roused such a temper

in her by this speech that he did not repeat the argument afterward.  She

said the old judge had treated her child a thousand times better than he

deserved, and had never done her an unkindness in his life; so she hated

these outlandish devils for killing him, and shouldn't ever sleep

satisfied till she saw them hanged for it. She was here to watch the

trial now, and was going to lift up just one "hooraw" over it if the

county judge put her in jail a year for it. She gave her turbaned head a

toss and said, "When dat verdic' comes, I's gwine to lif' dat ROOF, now,

I TELL you."



Pembroke Howard briefly sketched the state's case. He said he would show

by a chain of circumstantial evidence without break or fault in it

anywhere, that the principal prisoner at the bar committed the murder;

that the motive was partly revenge, and partly a desire to take his own

life out of jeopardy, and that his brother, by his presence, was a

consenting accessory to the crime; a crime which was the basest known to

the calendar of human misdeeds--assassination; that it was conceived by

the blackest of hearts and consummated by the cowardliest of hands; a

crime which had broken a loving sister's heart, blighted the happiness of

a young nephew who was as dear as a son, brought inconsolable grief to

many friends, and sorrow and loss to the whole community.  The utmost

penalty of the outraged law would be exacted, and upon the accused, now

present at the bar, that penalty would unquestionably be executed.  He

would reserve further remark until his closing speech.



He was strongly moved, and so also was the whole house; Mrs. Pratt and

several other women were weeping when he sat down, and many an eye that

was full of hate was riveted upon the unhappy prisoners.



Witness after witness was called by the state, and questioned at length;

but the cross questioning was brief. Wilson knew they could furnish

nothing valuable for his side. People were sorry for Pudd'nhead Wilson;

his budding career would get hurt by this trial.



Several witnesses swore they heard Judge Driscoll say in his public

speech that the twins would be able to find their lost knife again when

they needed it to assassinate somebody with. This was not news, but now

it was seen to have been sorrowfully prophetic, and a profound sensation

quivered through the hushed courtroom when those dismal words were

repeated.



The public prosecutor rose and said that it was within his knowledge,

through a conversation held with Judge Driscoll on the last day of his

life, that counsel for the defense had brought him a challenge from the

person charged at the bar with murder; that he had refused to fight with

a confessed assassin--"that is, on the field of honor," but had added

significantly, that he would be ready for him elsewhere.  Presumably

the person here charged with murder was warned that he must kill or be

killed the first time he should meet Judge Driscoll.  If counsel for the

defense chose to let the statement stand so, he would not call him to the

witness stand.  Mr. Wilson said he would offer no denial. [Murmurs in the

house:  "It is getting worse and worse for Wilson's case."]



Mrs. Pratt testified that she heard no outcry, and did not know what woke

her up, unless it was the sound of rapid footsteps approaching the front

door.  She jumped up and ran out in the hall just as she was, and heard

the footsteps flying up the front steps and then following behind her as

she ran to the sitting room. There she found the accused standing over

her murdered brother. [Here she broke down and sobbed.  Sensation in the

court.] Resuming, she said the persons entered behind her were Mr. Rogers

and Mr. Buckstone.



Cross-examined by Wilson, she said the twins proclaimed their innocence;

declared that they had been taking a walk, and had hurried to the house

in response to a cry for help which was so loud and strong that they had

heard it at a considerable distance; that they begged her and the

gentlemen just mentioned to examine their hands and clothes--which was

done, and no blood stains found.



Confirmatory evidence followed from Rogers and Buckstone.



The finding of the knife was verified, the advertisement minutely

describing it and offering a reward for it was put in evidence, and its

exact correspondence with that description proved. Then followed a few

minor details, and the case for the state was closed.



Wilson said that he had three witnesses, the Misses Clarkson, who would

testify that they met a veiled young woman leaving Judge Driscoll's

premises by the back gate a few minutes after the cries for help were

heard, and that their evidence, taken with certain circumstantial

evidence which he would call the court's attention to, would in his

opinion convince the court that there was still one person concerned in

this crime who had not yet been found, and also that a stay of

proceedings ought to be granted, in justice to his clients, until that

person should be discovered.  As it was late, he would ask leave to defer

the examination of his three witnesses until the next morning.



The crowd poured out of the place and went flocking away in excited

groups and couples, taking the events of the session over with vivacity

and consuming interest, and everybody seemed to have had a satisfactory

and enjoyable day except the accused, their counsel, and their old lady

friend.  There was no cheer among these, and no substantial hope.



In parting with the twins Aunt Patsy did attempt a good-night with a gay

pretense of hope and cheer in it, but broke down without finishing.



Absolutely secure as Tom considered himself to be, the opening

solemnities of the trial had nevertheless oppressed him with a vague

uneasiness, his being a nature sensitive to even the smallest alarms; but

from the moment that the poverty and weakness of Wilson's case lay

exposed to the court, he was comfortable once more, even jubilant.  He

left the courtroom sarcastically sorry for Wilson.  "The Clarksons met an

unknown woman in the back lane," he said to himself, "THAT is his case!

I'll give him a century to find her in--a couple of them if he likes. A

woman who doesn't exist any longer, and the clothes that gave her her sex

burnt up and the ashes thrown away--oh, certainly, he'll find HER easy

enough!"  This reflection set him to admiring, for the hundredth time,

the shrewd ingenuities by which he had insured himself against

detection--more, against even suspicion.



"Nearly always in cases like this there is some little detail or other

overlooked, some wee little track or trace left behind, and detection

follows; but here there's not even the faintest suggestion of a trace

left.  No more than a bird leaves when it flies through the air--yes,

through the night, you may say. The man that can track a bird through the

air in the dark and find that bird is the man to track me out and find

the judge's assassin--no other need apply.  And that is the job that has

been laid out for poor Pudd'nhead Wilson, of all people in the world!

Lord, it will be pathetically funny to see him grubbing and groping after

that woman that don't exist, and the right person sitting under his very

nose all the time!" The more he thought the situation over, the more the

humor of it struck him.  Finally he said, "I'll never let him hear the

last of that woman.  Every time I catch him in company, to his dying day,

I'll ask him in the guileless affectionate way that used to gravel him so

when I inquired how his unborn law business was coming along, 'Got on her

track yet--hey, Pudd'nhead?'"  He wanted to laugh, but that would not

have answered; there were people about, and he was mourning for his

uncle.  He made up his mind that it would be good entertainment to look

in on Wilson that night and watch him worry over his barren law case and

goad him with an exasperating word or two of sympathy and commiseration

now and then.



Wilson wanted no supper, he had no appetite.  He got out all the

fingerprints of girls and women in his collection of records and pored

gloomily over them an hour or more, trying to convince himself that that

troublesome girl's marks were there somewhere and had been overlooked.

But it was not so.  He drew back his chair, clasped his hands over his

head, and gave himself up to dull and arid musings.



Tom Driscoll dropped in, an hour after dark, and said with a pleasant

laugh as he took a seat:



"Hello, we've gone back to the amusements of our days of neglect and

obscurity for consolation, have we?" and he took up one of the glass

strips and held it against the light to inspect it. "Come, cheer up, old

man; there's no use in losing your grip and going back to this child's

play merely because this big sunspot is drifting across your shiny new

disk.  It'll pass, and you'll be all right again"--and he laid the glass

down. "Did you think you could win always?"



"Oh, no," said Wilson, with a sigh, "I didn't expect that, but I can't

believe Luigi killed your uncle, and I feel very sorry for him.  It makes

me blue.  And you would feel as I do, Tom, if you were not prejudiced

against those young fellows."



"I don't know about that," and Tom's countenance darkened, for his memory

reverted to his kicking.  "I owe them no good will, considering the

brunet one's treatment of me that night. Prejudice or no prejudice,

Pudd'nhead, I don't like them, and when they get their deserts you're not

going to find me sitting on the mourner's bench."



He took up another strip of glass, and exclaimed:



"Why, here's old Roxy's label!  Are you going to ornament the royal

palaces with nigger paw marks, too?  By the date here, I was seven months

old when this was done, and she was nursing me and her little nigger cub.

There's a line straight across her thumbprint. How comes that?" and Tom

held out the piece of glass to Wilson.



"That is common," said the bored man, wearily. "Scar of a cut or a

scratch, usually"--and he took the strip of glass indifferently, and

raised it toward the lamp.



All the blood sank suddenly out of his face; his hand quaked, and he

gazed at the polished surface before him with the glassy stare of a

corpse.



"Great heavens, what's the matter with you, Wilson? Are you going to

faint?"



Tom sprang for a glass of water and offered it, but Wilson shrank

shuddering from him and said:



"No, no!--take it away!"  His breast was rising and falling, and he moved

his head about in a dull and wandering way, like a person who had been

stunned.  Presently he said, "I shall feel better when I get to bed; I

have been overwrought today; yes, and overworked for many days."



"Then I'll leave you and let you get to your rest. Good night, old man."

But as Tom went out he couldn't deny himself a small parting gibe:

"Don't take it so hard; a body can't win every time; you'll hang somebody

yet."



Wilson muttered to himself, "It is no lie to say I am sorry I have to

begin with you, miserable dog though you are!"



He braced himself up with a glass of cold whisky, and went to work again.

He did not compare the new finger marks unintentionally left by Tom a few

minutes before on Roxy's glass with the tracings of the marks left on the

knife handle, there being no need for that (for his trained eye), but

busied himself with another matter, muttering from time to time, "Idiot

that I was!--Nothing but a GIRL would do me--a man in girl's clothes

never occurred to me."  First, he hunted out the plate containing the

fingerprints made by Tom when he was twelve years old, and laid it by

itself; then he brought forth the marks made by Tom's baby fingers when

he was a suckling of seven months, and placed these two plates with the

one containing this subject's newly (and unconsciously) made record.



"Now the series is complete," he said with satisfaction, and sat down to

inspect these things and enjoy them.



But his enjoyment was brief.  He stared a considerable time at the three

strips, and seemed stupefied with astonishment. At last he put them down

and said, "I can't make it out at all--hang it, the baby's don't tally

with the others!"



He walked the floor for half an hour puzzling over his enigma, then he

hunted out the other glass plates.



He sat down and puzzled over these things a good while, but kept

muttering, "It's no use; I can't understand it. They don't tally right,

and yet I'll swear the names and dates are right, and so of course they

OUGHT to tally.  I never labeled one of these thing carelessly in my

life.  There is a most extraordinary mystery here."



He was tired out now, and his brains were beginning to clog. He said he

would sleep himself fresh, and then see what he could do with this

riddle.  He slept through a troubled and unrestful hour, then

unconsciousness began to shred away, and presently he rose drowsily to a

sitting posture.  "Now what was that dream?" he said, trying to recall

it.  "What was that dream?  It seemed to unravel that puz--"



He landed in the middle of the floor at a bound, without finishing the

sentence, and ran and turned up his light and seized his "records."  He

took a single swift glance at them and cried out:



"It's so!  Heavens, what a revelation!  And for twenty-three years no man

has ever suspected it!"









CHAPTER 21



Doom



He is useless on top of the ground; he ought to be under it, inspiring

the cabbages.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



APRIL 1.  This is the day upon which we are reminded of what we are on

the other three hundred and sixty-four.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



Wilson put on enough clothes for business purposes and went to work

under a high pressure of steam.  He was awake all over. All sense of

weariness had been swept away by the invigorating refreshment of the

great and hopeful discovery which he had made. He made fine and accurate

reproductions of a number of his "records," and then enlarged them on a

scale of ten to one with his pantograph.  He did these pantograph

enlargements on sheets of white cardboard, and made each individual line

of the bewildering maze of whorls or curves or loops which consisted of

the "pattern" of a "record" stand out bold and black by reinforcing it

with ink.  To the untrained eye the collection of delicate originals made

by the human finger on the glass plates looked about alike; but when

enlarged ten times they resembled the markings of a block of wood that

has been sawed across the grain, and the dullest eye could detect at a

glance, and at a distance of many feet, that no two of the patterns were

alike. When Wilson had at last finished his tedious and difficult work,

he arranged his results according to a plan in which a progressive order

and sequence was a principal feature; then he added to the batch several

pantograph enlargements which he had made from time to time in bygone

years.



The night was spent and the day well advanced now.  By the time he had

snatched a trifle of breakfast, it was nine o'clock, and the court was

ready to begin its sitting.  He was in his place twelve minutes later

with his "records."



Tom Driscoll caught a slight glimpse of the records, and nudged his

nearest friend and said, with a wink, "Pudd'nhead's got a rare eye to

business--thinks that as long as he can't win his case it's at least a

noble good chance to advertise his window palace decorations without any

expense."  Wilson was informed that his witnesses had been delayed, but

would arrive presently; but he rose and said he should probably not have

occasion to make use of their testimony.  [An amused murmur ran through

the room:  "It's a clean backdown! he gives up without hitting a lick!"]

Wilson continued:  "I have other testimony--and better.  [This compelled

interest, and evoked murmurs of surprise that had a detectable ingredient

of disappointment in them.] If I seem to be springing this evidence upon

the court, I offer as my justification for this, that I did not discover

its existence until late last night, and have been engaged in examining

and classifying it ever since, until half an hour ago. I shall offer it

presently; but first I wish to say a few preliminary words.



"May it please the court, the claim given the front place, the claim most

persistently urged, the claim most strenuously and I may even say

aggressively and defiantly insisted upon by the prosecution is this--that

the person whose hand left the bloodstained fingerprints upon the handle

of the Indian knife is the person who committed the murder."  Wilson

paused, during several moments, to give impressiveness to what he was

about to say, and then added tranquilly, "WE GRANT THAT CLAIM."



It was an electrical surprise.  No one was prepared for such an

admission.  A buzz of astonishment rose on all sides, and people were

heard to intimate that the overworked lawyer had lost his mind.  Even the

veteran judge, accustomed as he was to legal ambushes and masked

batteries in criminal procedure, was not sure that his ears were not

deceiving him, and asked counsel what it was he had said.  Howard's

impassive face betrayed no sign, but his attitude and bearing lost

something of their careless confidence for a moment.  Wilson resumed:



"We not only grant that claim, but we welcome it and strongly endorse it.

Leaving that matter for the present, we will now proceed to consider

other points in the case which we propose to establish by evidence, and

shall include that one in the chain in its proper place."



He had made up his mind to try a few hardy guesses, in mapping out his

theory of the origin and motive of the murder--guesses designed to fill

up gaps in it--guesses which could help if they hit, and would probably

do no harm if they didn't.



"To my mind, certain circumstances of the case before the court seem to

suggest a motive for the homicide quite different from the one insisted

on by the state.  It is my conviction that the motive was not revenge,

but robbery.  It has been urged that the presence of the accused brothers

in that fatal room, just after notification that one of them must take

the life  of Judge Driscoll or lose his own the moment the parties should

meet, clearly signifies that the natural instinct of self-preservation 

moved my clients to go there secretly and save Count Luigi by destroying

his adversary.



"Then why did they stay there, after the deed was done? Mrs. Pratt had

time, although she did not hear the cry for help, but woke up some

moments later, to run to that room--and there she found these men

standing and making no effort to escape. If they were guilty, they ought

to have been running out of the house at the same time that she was

running to that room. If they had had such a strong instinct toward

self-preservation as to move them to kill that unarmed man, what had

become of it now, when it should have been more alert than ever.  Would

any of us have remained there?  Let us not slander our intelligence to

that degree.



"Much stress has been laid upon the fact that the accused offered a very

large reward for the knife with which this murder was done; that no thief

came forward to claim that extraordinary reward; that the latter fact was

good circumstantial evidence that the claim that the knife had been

stolen was a vanity and a fraud; that these details taken in connection

with the memorable and apparently prophetic speech of the deceased

concerning that knife, and the finally discovery of that very knife in

the fatal room where no living person was found present with the

slaughtered man but the owner of the knife and his brother, form an

indestructible chain of evidence which fixed the crime upon those

unfortunate strangers.



"But I shall presently ask to be sworn, and shall testify that there was

a large reward offered for the THIEF, also; and it was offered secretly

and not advertised; that this fact was indiscreetly mentioned--or at

least tacitly admitted--in what was supposed to be safe circumstances,

but may NOT have been. The thief may have been present himself.  [Tom

Driscoll had been looking at the speaker, but dropped his eyes at this

point.] In that case he would retain the knife in his possession, not

daring to offer it for sale, or for pledge in a pawnshop.  [There was a

nodding of heads among the audience by way of admission that this was not

a bad stroke.]  I shall prove to the satisfaction of the jury that there

WAS a person in Judge Driscoll's room several minutes before the accused

entered it.  [This produced a strong sensation; the last drowsy head in

the courtroom roused up now, and made preparation to listen.]  If it

shall seem necessary, I will prove by the Misses Clarkson that they met a

veiled person--ostensibly a woman--coming out of the back gate a few

minutes after the cry for help was heard.  This person was not a woman,

but a man dressed in woman's clothes."  Another sensation. Wilson had his

eye on Tom when he hazarded this guess, to see what effect it would

produce.  He was satisfied with the result, and said to himself, "It was

a success--he's hit!"



The object of that person in that house was robbery, not murder.  It is

true that the safe was not open, but there was an ordinary cashbox on the

table, with three thousand dollars in it. It is easily supposable that

the thief was concealed in the house; that he knew of this box, and of

its owner's habit of counting its contents and arranging his accounts at

night--if he had that habit, which I do not assert, of course--that he

tried to take the box while its owner slept, but made a noise and was

seized, and had to use the knife to save himself from capture; and that

he fled without his booty because he heard help coming.



"I have now done with my theory, and will proceed to the evidences by

which I propose to try to prove its soundness." Wilson took up several of

his strips of glass.  When the audience recognized these familiar

mementos of Pudd'nhead's old time childish "puttering" and folly, the

tense and funereal interest vanished out of their faces, and the house

burst into volleys of relieving and refreshing laughter, and Tom chirked

up and joined in the fun himself; but Wilson was apparently not

disturbed. He arranged his records on the table before him, and said:



"I beg the indulgence of the court while I make a few remarks in

explanation of some evidence which I am about to introduce, and which I

shall presently ask to be allowed to verify under oath on the witness

stand.  Every human being carries with him from his cradle to his grave

certain physical marks which do not change their character, and by which

he can always be identified--and that without shade of doubt or question.

These marks are his signature, his physiological autograph, so to speak,

and this autograph can not be counterfeited, nor can he disguise it or

hide it away, nor can it become illegible by the wear and mutations of

time. This signature is not his face--age can change that beyond

recognition; it is not his hair, for that can fall out; it is not his

height, for duplicates of that exist; it is not his form, for duplicates

of that exist also, whereas this signature is each man's very own--there

is no duplicate of it among the swarming populations of the globe!  [The

audience were interested once more.]



"This autograph consists of the delicate lines or corrugations with which

Nature marks the insides of the hands and the soles of the feet.  If you

will look at the balls of your fingers--you that have very sharp

eyesight--you will observe that these dainty curving lines lie close

together, like those that indicate the borders of oceans in maps, and

that they form various clearly defined patterns, such as arches, circles,

long curves, whorls, etc., and that these patterns differ on the different

fingers.  [Every man in the room had his hand up to the light now, and

his head canted to one side, and was minutely scrutinizing the balls of

his fingers; there were whispered ejaculations of "Why, it's so--I never

noticed that before!"] The patterns on the right hand are not the same as

those on the left. [Ejaculations of "Why, that's so, too!"]  Taken finger

for finger, your patterns differ from your neighbor's.  [Comparisons were

made all over the house--even the judge and jury were absorbed in this

curious work.]  The patterns of a twin's right hand are not the same as

those on his left.  One twin's patters are never the same as his fellow

twin's patters--the jury will find that the patterns upon the finger

balls of the twins' hands follow this rule.  [An examination of the

twins' hands was begun at once.] You have often heard of twins who were

so exactly alike that when dressed alike their own parents could not tell

them apart. Yet there was never a twin born in to this world that did not

carry from birth to death a sure identifier in this mysterious and

marvelous natal autograph.  That once known to you, his fellow twin could

never personate him and deceive you."



Wilson stopped and stood silent.  Inattention dies a quick and sure death

when a speaker does that.  The stillness gives warning that something is

coming.  All palms and finger balls went down now, all slouching forms

straightened, all heads came up, all eyes were fastened upon Wilson's

face.  He waited yet one, two, three moments, to let his pause complete

and perfect its spell upon the house; then, when through the profound

hush he could hear the ticking of the clock on the wall, he put out his

hand and took the Indian knife by the blade and held it aloft where all

could see the sinister spots upon its ivory handle; then he said, in a

level and passionless voice:



"Upon this haft stands the assassin's natal autograph, written in the

blood of that helpless and unoffending old man who loved you and whom you

all loved.  There is but one man in the whole earth whose hand can

duplicate that crimson sign"--he paused and raised his eyes to the

pendulum swinging back and forth--"and please God we will produce that

man in this room before the clock strikes noon!"



Stunned, distraught, unconscious of its own movement, the house half

rose, as if expecting to see the murderer appear at the door, and a

breeze of muttered ejaculations swept the place. "Order in the

court!--sit down!"  This from the sheriff.  He was obeyed, and quiet

reigned again.  Wilson stole a glance at Tom, and said to himself, "He is

flying signals of distress now; even people who despise him are pitying

him; they think this is a hard ordeal for a young fellow who has lost his

benefactor by so cruel a stroke--and they are right."  He resumed his

speech:



"For more than twenty years I have amused my compulsory leisure with

collecting these curious physical signatures in this town. At my house I

have hundreds upon hundreds of them. Each and every one is labeled with

name and date; not labeled the next day or even the next hour, but in the

very minute that the impression was taken.  When I go upon the witness

stand I will repeat under oath the things which I am now saying.  I have

the fingerprints of the court, the sheriff, and every member of the jury.

There is hardly a person in this room, white or black, whose natal

signature I cannot produce, and not one of them can so disguise himself

that I cannot pick him out from a multitude of his fellow creatures and

unerringly identify him by his hands. And if he and I should live to be a

hundred I could still do it. [The interest of the audience was steadily

deepening now.]



"I have studied some of these signatures so much that I know them as well

as the bank cashier knows the autograph of his oldest customer.  While I

turn my back now, I beg that several persons will be so good as to pass

their fingers through their hair, and then press them upon one of the

panes of the window near the jury, and that among them the accused may

set THEIR finger marks.  Also, I beg that these experimenters, or others,

will set their fingers upon another pane, and add again the marks of the

accused, but not placing them in the same order or relation to the other

signatures as before--for, by one chance in a million, a person might

happen upon the right marks by pure guesswork, ONCE, therefore I wish to

be tested twice."



He turned his back, and the two panes were quickly covered with

delicately lined oval spots, but visible only to such persons as could

get a dark background for them--the foliage of a tree, outside, for

instance.  Then upon call, Wilson went to the window, made his

examination, and said:



"This is Count Luigi's right hand; this one, three signatures below, is

his left.  Here is Count Angelo's right; down here is his left.  Now for

the other pane:  here and here are Count Luigi's, here and here are his

brother's."  He faced about. "Am I right?"



A deafening explosion of applause was the answer. The bench said:



"This certainly approaches the miraculous!"



Wilson turned to the window again and remarked, pointing with his finger:



"This is the signature of Mr. Justice Robinson.  [Applause.] This, of

Constable Blake.  [Applause.]  This of John Mason, juryman. [Applause.]

This, of the sheriff.  [Applause.] I cannot name the others, but I have

them all at home, named and dated, and could identify them all by my

fingerprint records."



He moved to his place through a storm of applause--which the sheriff

stopped, and also made the people sit down, for they were all standing

and struggling to see, of course.  Court, jury, sheriff, and everybody

had been too absorbed in observing Wilson's performance to attend to the

audience earlier.



"Now then," said Wilson, "I have here the natal autographs of the two

children--thrown up to ten times the natural size by the pantograph, so

that anyone who can see at all can tell the markings apart at a glance.

We will call the children A and B. Here are A's finger marks, taken at

the age of five months. Here they are again taken at seven months.  [Tom

started.] They are alike, you see.  Here are B's at five months, and also

at seven months.  They, too, exactly copy each other, but the patterns

are quite different from A's, you observe.  I shall refer to these again

presently, but we will turn them face down now.



"Here, thrown up ten sizes, are the natal autographs of the two persons

who are here before you accused of murdering Judge Driscoll. I made these

pantograph copies last night, and will so swear when I go upon the

witness stand.  I ask the jury to compare them with the finger marks of

the accused upon the windowpanes, and tell the court if they are the

same."



He passed a powerful magnifying glass to the foreman.



One juryman after another took the cardboard and the glass and made the

comparison.  Then the foreman said to the judge:



"Your honor, we are all agreed that they are identical."



Wilson said to the foreman:



"Please turn that cardboard face down, and take this one, and compare it

searchingly, by the magnifier, with the fatal signature upon the knife

handle, and report your finding to the court."



Again the jury made minute examinations, and again reported:



"We find them to be exactly identical, your honor."



Wilson turned toward the counsel for the prosecution, and there was a

clearly recognizable note of warning in his voice when he said:



"May it please the court, the state has claimed, strenuously and

persistently, that the bloodstained fingerprints upon that knife handle

were left there by the assassin of Judge Driscoll. You have heard us

grant that claim, and welcome it."  He turned to the jury:  "Compare the

fingerprints of the accused with the fingerprints left by the

assassin--and report."



The comparison began.  As it proceeded, all movement and all sound

ceased, and the deep silence of an absorbed and waiting suspense settled

upon the house; and when at last the words came, "THEY DO NOT EVEN

RESEMBLE," a thundercrash of applause followed and the house sprang to

its feet, but was quickly repressed by official force and brought to

order again.  Tom was altering his position every few minutes now, but

none of his changes brought repose nor any small trifle of comfort.  When

the house's attention was become fixed once more, Wilson said gravely,

indicating the twins with a gesture:



"These men are innocent--I have no further concern with them. [Another

outbreak of applause began, but was promptly checked.] We will now

proceed to find the guilty.  [Tom's eyes were starting from their

sockets--yes, it was a cruel day for the bereaved youth, everybody

thought.]  We will return to the infant autographs of A and B.  I will

ask the jury to take these large pantograph facsimilies of A's marked

five months and seven months. Do they tally?"



The foreman responded:  "Perfectly."



"Now examine this pantograph, taken at eight months, and also marked A.

Does it tally with the other two?"



The surprised response was:



"NO--THEY DIFFER WIDELY!"



"You are quite right.  Now take these two pantographs of B's autograph,

marked five months and seven months.  Do they tally with each other?"



"Yes--perfectly."



"Take this third pantograph marked B, eight months. Does it tally with

B's other two?"



"BY NO MEANS!"



"Do you know how to account for those strange discrepancies? I will tell

you.  For a purpose unknown to us, but probably a selfish one, somebody

changed those children in the cradle."



This produced a vast sensation, naturally; Roxana was astonished at this

admirable guess, but not disturbed by it. To guess the exchange was one

thing, to guess who did it quite another. Pudd'nhead Wilson could do

wonderful things, no doubt, but he couldn't do impossible ones.  Safe?

She was perfectly safe. She smiled privately.



"Between the ages of seven months and eight months those children were

changed in the cradle"--he made one of this effect--collecting pauses,

and added--"and the person who did it is in this house!"



Roxy's pulses stood still!  The house was thrilled as with an electric

shock, and the people half rose as if to seek a glimpse of the person who

had made that exchange.  Tom was growing limp; the life seemed oozing out

of him.  Wilson resumed:



"A was put into B's cradle in the nursery; B was transferred to the

kitchen and became a Negro and a slave [Sensation--confusion of angry

ejaculations]--but within a quarter of an hour he will stand before you

white and free!  [Burst of applause, checked by the officers.]  From

seven months onward until now, A has still been a usurper, and in my

finger record he bears B's name. Here is his pantograph at the age of

twelve. Compare it with the assassin's signature upon the knife handle.

Do they tally?"



The foreman answered:



"TO THE MINUTEST DETAIL!"



Wilson said, solemnly:



"The murderer of your friend and mine--York Driscoll of the generous hand

and the kindly spirit--sits in among you. Valet de Chambre, Negro and

slave--falsely called Thomas a Becket Driscoll--make upon the window the

fingerprints that will hang you!"



Tom turned his ashen face imploring toward the speaker, made some

impotent movements with his white lips, then slid limp and lifeless to

the floor.



Wilson broke the awed silence with the words:



"There is no need.  He has confessed."



Roxy flung herself upon her knees, covered her face with her hands, and

out through her sobs the words struggled:



"De Lord have mercy on me, po' misasble sinner dat I is!"



The clock struck twelve.



The court rose; the new prisoner, handcuffed, was removed.







CONCLUSION



It is often the case that the man who can't tell a lie thinks he is the

best judge of one.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



OCTOBER 12, THE DISCOVERY.  It was wonderful to find America, but it

would have been more wonderful to miss it.



--Pudd'nhead Wilson's Calendar



The town sat up all night to discuss the amazing events of the day and

swap guesses as to when Tom's trial would begin. Troop after troop of

citizens came to serenade Wilson, and require a speech, and shout

themselves hoarse over every sentence that fell from his lips--for all

his sentences were golden, now, all were marvelous.  His long fight

against hard luck and prejudice was ended; he was a made man for good.

And as each of these roaring gangs of enthusiasts marched away, some

remorseful member of it was quite sure to raise his voice and say:



"And this is the man the likes of us have called a pudd'nhead for more

than twenty years.  He has resigned from that position, friends."



"Yes, but it isn't vacant--we're elected."



The twins were heroes of romance, now, and with rehabilitated

reputations.  But they were weary of Western adventure, and straightway

retired to Europe.



Roxy's heart was broken.  The young fellow upon whom she had inflicted

twenty-three years of slavery continued the false heir's pension of

thirty-five dollars a month to her, but her hurts were too deep for money

to heal; the spirit in her eye was quenched, her martial bearing departed

with it, and the voice of her laughter ceased in the land.  In her church

and its affairs she found her only solace.



The real heir suddenly found himself rich and free, but in a most

embarrassing situation.  He could neither read nor write, and his speech

was the basest dialect of the Negro quarter. His gait, his attitudes, his

gestures, his bearing, his laugh--all were vulgar and uncouth; his

manners were the manners of a slave. Money and fine clothes could not

mend these defects or cover them up; they only made them more glaring and

the more pathetic. The poor fellow could not endure the terrors of the

white man's parlor, and felt at home and at peace nowhere but in the

kitchen. The family pew was a misery to him, yet he could nevermore enter

into the solacing refuge of the "nigger gallery"--that was closed to him

for good and all.  But we cannot follow his curious fate further--that

would be a long story.



The false heir made a full confession and was sentenced to imprisonment

for life.  But now a complication came up. The Percy Driscoll estate was

in such a crippled shape when its owner died that it could pay only sixty

percent of its great indebtedness, and was settled at that rate.  But the

creditors came forward now, and complained that inasmuch as through an

error for which THEY were in no way to blame the false heir was not

inventoried at the time with the rest of the property, great wrong and

loss had thereby been inflicted upon them. They rightly claimed that

"Tom" was lawfully their property and had been so for eight years; that

they had already lost sufficiently in being deprived of his services

during that long period, and ought not to be required to add anything to

that loss; that if he had been delivered up to them in the first place,

they would have sold him and he could not have murdered Judge Driscoll;

therefore it was not that he had really committed the murder, the guilt

lay with the erroneous inventory.  Everybody saw that there was reason in

this.  Everybody granted that if "Tom" were white and free it would be

unquestionably right to punish him--it would be no loss to anybody; but

to shut up a valuable slave for life--that was quite another matter.



As soon as the Governor understood the case, he pardoned Tom at once, and

the creditors sold him down the river.











Author's Note to THOSE EXTRAORDINARY TWINS



A man who is not born with the novel-writing gift has a troublesome time

of it when he tries to build a novel. I know this from experience.  He

has no clear idea of his story; in fact he has no story.  He merely has

some people in his mind, and an incident or two, also a locality, and he

trusts he can plunge those people into those incidents with interesting

results. So he goes to work.  To write a novel?  No--that is a thought

which comes later; in the beginning he is only proposing to tell a little

tale, a very little tale, a six-page tale.  But as it is a tale which he

is not acquainted with, and can only find out what it is by listening as

it goes along telling itself, it is more than apt to go on and on and on

till it spreads itself into a book. I know about this, because it has

happened to me so many times.



And I have noticed another thing:  that as the short tale grows into the

long tale, the original intention (or motif) is apt to get abolished and

find itself superseded by a quite different one.  It was so in the case

of a magazine sketch which I once started to write--a funny and fantastic

sketch about a prince and a pauper; it presently assumed a grave cast of

its own accord, and in that new shape spread itself out into a book. Much

the same thing happened with PUDD'NHEAD WILSON.  I had a sufficiently

hard time with that tale, because it changed itself from a farce to a

tragedy while I was going along with it--a most embarrassing

circumstance.  But what was a great deal worse was, that it was not one

story, but two stories tangled together; and they obstructed and

interrupted each other at every turn and created no end of confusion and

annoyance.  I could not offer the book for publication, for I was afraid

it would unseat the reader's reason, I did not know what was the matter

with it, for I had not noticed, as yet, that it was two stories in one.

It took me months to make that discovery.  I carried the manuscript back

and forth across the Atlantic two or three times, and read it and studied

over it on shipboard; and at last I saw where the difficulty lay.  I had

no further trouble.  I pulled one of the stories out by the roots, and

left the other--a kind of literary Caesarean operation.



Would the reader care to know something about the story which I pulled

out?  He has been told many a time how the born-and-trained novelist

works; won't he let me round and complete his knowledge by telling him

how the jackleg does it?



Originally the story was called THOSE EXTRAORDINARY TWINS. I meant to

make it very short.  I had seen a picture of a youthful Italian

"freak"--or "freaks"--which was--or which were--on exhibition in our

cities--a combination consisting of two heads and four arms joined to a

single body and a single pair of legs--and I thought I would write an

extravagantly fantastic little story with this freak of nature for

hero--or heroes--a silly young miss for heroine, and two old ladies and

two boys for the minor parts.  I lavishly elaborated these people and

their doings, of course.  But the take kept spreading along and spreading

along, and other people got to intruding themselves and taking up more

and more room with their talk and their affairs. Among them came a

stranger named Pudd'nhead Wilson, and woman named Roxana; and presently

the doings of these two pushed up into prominence a young fellow named

Tom Driscoll, whose proper place was away in the obscure background.

Before the book was half finished those three were taking things almost

entirely into their own hands and working the whole tale as a private

venture of their own--a tale which they had nothing at all to do with, by

rights.



When the book was finished and I came to look around to see what had

become of the team I had originally started out with--Aunt Patsy Cooper,

Aunt Betsy Hale, and two boys, and Rowena the lightweight heroine--they

were nowhere to be seen; they had disappeared from the story some time or

other.  I hunted about and found them--found them stranded, idle,

forgotten, and permanently useless.  It was very awkward.  It was awkward

all around, but more particularly in the case of Rowena, because there

was a love match on, between her and one of the twins that constituted

the freak, and I had worked it up to a blistering heat and thrown in a

quite dramatic love quarrel, wherein Rowena scathingly denounced her

betrothed for getting drunk, and scoffed at his explanation of how it had

happened, and wouldn't listen to it, and had driven him from her in the

usual "forever" way; and now here she sat crying and brokenhearted; for

she had found that he had spoken only the truth; that is was not he, but

the other of the freak that had drunk the liquor that made him drunk;

that her half was a prohibitionist and had never drunk a drop in his

life, and altogether tight as a brick three days in the week, was wholly

innocent of blame; and indeed, when sober, was constantly doing all he

could to reform his brother, the other half, who never got any

satisfaction out of drinking, anyway, because liquor never affected him.

Yes, here she was, stranded with that deep injustice of hers torturing

her poor torn heart.



I didn't know what to do with her.  I was as sorry for her as anybody

could be, but the campaign was over, the book was finished, she was

sidetracked, and there was no possible way of crowding her in, anywhere.

I could not leave her there, of course; it would not do.  After spreading

her out so, and making such a to-do over her affairs, it would be

absolutely necessary to account to the reader for her.  I thought and

thought and studied and studied; but I arrived at nothing.  I finally saw

plainly that there was really no way but one--I must simply give her the

grand bounce.  It grieved me to do it, for after associating with her so

much I had come to kind of like her after a fashion, notwithstanding

things and was so nauseatingly sentimental. Still it had to be done.  So

at the top of Chapter XVII I put a "Calendar" remark concerning July the

Fourth, and began the chapter with this statistic:



"Rowena went out in the backyard after supper to see the fireworks and

fell down the well and got drowned."



It seemed abrupt, but I thought maybe the reader wouldn't notice it,

because I changed the subject right away to something else. Anyway it

loosened up Rowena from where she was stuck and got her out of the way,

and that was the main thing.  It seemed a prompt good way of weeding out

people that had got stalled, and a plenty good enough way for those

others; so I hunted up the two boys and said, "They went out back one

night to stone the cat and fell down the well and got drowned."  Next I

searched around and found old Aunt Patsy and Aunt Betsy Hale where they

were around, and said, "They went out back one night to visit the sick

and fell down the well and got drowned."  I was going to drown some

others, but I gave up the idea, partly because I believed that if I kept

that up it would arouse attention, and perhaps sympathy with those people,

and partly because it was not a large well and would not hold any more

anyway.



Still the story was unsatisfactory.  Here was a set of new characters who

were become inordinately prominent and who persisted in remaining so to

the end; and back yonder was an older set who made a large noise and a

great to-do for a little while and then suddenly played out utterly and

fell down the well. There was a radical defect somewhere, and I must

search it out and cure it.



The defect turned out to be the one already spoken of--two stories in

one, a farce and a tragedy.  So I pulled out the farce and left the

tragedy.  This left the original team in, but only as mere names, not as

characters.  Their prominence was wholly gone; they were not even worth

drowning; so I removed that detail. Also I took the twins apart and made

two separate men of them. They had no occasion to have foreign names now,

but it was too much trouble to remove them all through, so I left them

christened as they were and made no explanation.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Tragedy of Pudd'nhead Wilson

by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)











THOSE EXTRAORDINARY TWINS



by Mark Twain







A man who is born with the novel-writing gift has a troublesome time of

it when he tries to build a novel.  I know this from experience.  He has

no clear idea of his story; in fact he has no story.  He merely has some

people in his mind, and an incident or two, also a locality.  He knows

these people, he knows the selected locality, and he trusts that he can

plunge those people into those incidents with interesting results.  So he

goes to work.  To write a novel?  No--that is a thought which comes

later; in the beginning he is only proposing to tell a little tale; a

very little tale; a six-page tale.  But as it is a tale which he is not

acquainted with, and can only find out what it is by listening as it goes

along telling itself, it is more than apt to go on and on and on till it

spreads itself into a book.  I know about this, because it has happened

to me so many times.



And I have noticed another thing: that as the short tale grows into the

long tale, the original intention (or motif) is apt to get abolished and

find itself superseded by a quite different one.  It was so in the case

of a magazine sketch which I once started to write--a funny and fantastic

sketch about a prince and a pauper; it presently assumed a grave cast of

its own accord, and in that new shape spread itself out into a book.

Much the same thing happened with "Pudd'nhead Wilson."  I had a

sufficiently hard time with that tale, because it changed itself from a

farce to a tragedy while I was going along with it--a most embarrassing

circumstance.  But what was a great deal worse was, that it was not one

story, but two stories tangled together; and they obstructed and

interrupted each other at every turn and created no end of confusion and

annoyance.  I could not offer the book for publication, for I was afraid

it would unseat the reader's reason.  I did not know what was the matter

with it, for I had not noticed, as yet, that it was two stories in one.

It took me months to make that discovery.  I carried the manuscript back

and forth across the Atlantic two or three times, and read it and studied

over it on shipboard; and at last I saw where the difficulty lay.  I had

no further trouble.  I pulled one of the stories out by the roots, and

left the other one--a kind of literary Caesarean operation.



Would the reader care to know something about the story which I pulled

out?  He has been told many a time how the born-and-trained novelist

works.  Won't he let me round and complete his knowledge by telling him

how the jack-leg does it?



Originally the story was called "Those Extraordinary Twins."  I meant to

make it very short.  I had seen a picture of a youthful Italian "freak"

or "freaks" which was--or which were--on exhibition in our cities--a

combination consisting of two heads and four arms joined to a single body

and a single pair of legs--and I thought I would write an extravagantly

fantastic little story with this freak of nature for hero--or heroes

--a silly young miss for heroine, and two old ladies and two boys for the

minor parts.  I lavishly elaborated these people and their doings, of

course.  But the tale kept spreading along, and spreading along, and

other people got to intruding themselves and taking up more and more room

with their talk and their affairs.  Among them came a stranger named

Pudd'nhead Wilson, and a woman named Roxana; and presently the doings of

these two pushed up into prominence a young fellow named Tom Driscoll,

whose proper place was away in the obscure background.  Before the book

was half finished those three were taking things almost entirely into

their own hands and working the whole tale as a private venture of their

own--a tale which they had nothing at all to do with, by rights.



When the book was finished and I came to look around to see what had

become of the team I had originally started out with--Aunt Patsy Cooper,

Aunt Betsy Hale, the two boys, and Rowena the light-weight heroine--they

were nowhere to be seen; they had disappeared from the story some time or

other.  I hunted about and found them found them stranded, idle,

forgotten, and permanently useless.  It was very awkward.  It was awkward

all around; but more particularly in the case of Rowena, because there

was a love-match on, between her and one of the twins that constituted

the freak, and I had worked it up to a blistering heat and thrown in a

quite dramatic love-quarrel, wherein Rowena scathingly denounced her

betrothed for getting drunk, and scoffed at his explanation of how it had

happened, and wouldn't listen to it, and had driven him from her in the

usual "forever" way; and now here she sat crying and broken-hearted; for

she had found that he had spoken only the truth; that it was not he, but

the other half of the freak, that had drunk the liquor that made him

drunk; that her half was a prohibitionist and had never drunk a drop in

his life, and, although tight as a brick three days in the week, was

wholly innocent of blame; and indeed, when sober, was constantly doing

all he could to reform his brother, the other half, who never got any

satisfaction out of drinking, anyway, because liquor never affected him.

Yes, here she was, stranded with that deep injustice of hers torturing

her poor torn heart.



I didn't know what to do with her.  I was as sorry for her as anybody

could be, but the campaign was over, the book was finished, she was

sidetracked, and there was no possible way of crowding her in, anywhere.

I could not leave her there, of course; it would not do.  After spreading

her out so, and making such a to-do over her affairs, it would be

absolutely necessary to account to the reader for her.  I thought and

thought and studied and studied; but I arrived at nothing.  I finally saw

plainly that there was really no way but one--I must simply give her the

grand bounce.  It grieved me to do it, for after associating with her so

much I had come to kind of like her after a fashion, notwithstanding she

was such an ass and said such stupid irritating things and was so

nauseatingly sentimental.  Still it had to be done.  So, at the top of

Chapter XVII, I put in a "Calendar" remark concerning July Fourth, and

began the chapter with this statistic:



"Rowena went out in the back yard after supper to see the fireworks and

fell down the well and got drowned."



It seemed abrupt, but I thought maybe the reader wouldn't notice it,

because I changed the subject right away to something else.  Anyway it

loosened up Rowena from where she was stuck and got her out of the way,

and that was the main thing.  It seemed a prompt good way of weeding out

people that had got stalled, and a plenty good enough way for those

others; so I hunted up the two boys and said "they went out back one

night to stone the cat and fell down the well and got drowned."  Next I

searched around and found old Aunt Patsy Cooper and Aunt Betsy Hale where

they were aground, and said "they went out back one night to visit the

sick and fell down the well and got drowned."  I was going to drown some

of the others, but I gave up the idea, partly because I believed that if

I kept that up it would arouse attention, and perhaps sympathy with those

people, and partly because it was not a large well and would not hold any

more anyway.



Still the story was unsatisfactory.  Here was a set of new characters who

were become inordinately prominent and who persisted in remaining so to

the end; and back yonder was an older set who made a large noise and a

great to-do for a little while and then suddenly played out utterly and

fell down the well.  There was a radical defect somewhere, and I must

search it out and cure it.



The defect turned out to be the one already spoken of--two stories in

one, a farce and a tragedy.  So I pulled out the farce and left the

tragedy.  This left the original team in, but only as mere names, not as

characters.  Their prominence was wholly gone; they were not even worth

drowning; so I removed that detail.  Also I took those twins apart and

made two separate men of them.  They had no occasion to have foreign

names now, but it was too much trouble to remove them all through, so I

left them christened as they were and made no explanation.













CHAPTER I



THE TWINS AS THEY REALLY WERE



The conglomerate twins were brought on the the stage in Chapter I of the

original extravaganza.  Aunt Patsy Cooper has received their letter

applying for board and lodging, and Rowena, her daughter, insane with

joy, is begging for a hearing of it:



"Well, set down then, and be quiet a minute and don't fly around so; it

fairly makes me tired to see you.  It starts off so: 'HONORED MADAM'--"



"I like that, ma, don't you?  It shows they're high-bred."



"Yes, I noticed that when I first read it.  'My brother and I have seen

your advertisement, by chance, in a copy of your local journal--'



"It's so beautiful and smooth, ma-don't you think so?"



"Yes, seems so to me--'and beg leave to take the room you offer.  We are

twenty-four years of age, and twins--'"



"Twins!  How sweet!  I do hope they are handsome, and I just know they

are!  Don't you hope they are, ma?"



"Land, I ain't particular.  'We are Italians by birth--'"



"It's so romantic!  Just think there's never been one in this town, and

everybody will want to see them, and they're all ours!  Think of that!"



"--'but have lived long in the various countries of Europe, and several

years in the United States.'"



"Oh, just think what wonders they've seen, ma!  Won't it be good to hear

them talk?"



"I reckon so; yes, I reckon so.  'Our names are Luigi and Angelo

Capello--'"



"Beautiful, perfectly beautiful!  Not like Jones and Robinson and those

horrible names."



"'You desire but one guest, but dear madam, if you will allow us to pay

for two we will not discommode you.  We will sleep together in the same

bed.  We have always been used to this, and prefer it.  And then he goes

on to say they will be down Thursday."



"And this is Tuesday--I don't know how I'm ever going to wait, ma!  The

time does drag along so, and I'm so dying to see them!  Which of them do

you reckon is the tallest, ma?"



"How do you s'pose I can tell, child?  Mostly they are the same

size-twins are."



"'Well then, which do you reckon is the best looking?"



"Goodness knows--I don't."



"I think Angelo is; it's the prettiest name, anyway.  Don't you think

it's a sweet name, ma?"



"Yes, it's well enough.  I'd like both of them better if I knew the way

to pronounce them--the Eyetalian way, I mean.  The Missouri way and the

Eyetalian way is different, I judge."



"Maybe--yes.  It's Luigi that writes the letter.  What do you reckon is

the reason Angelo didn't write it?"



"Why, how can I tell?  What's the difference who writes it, so long as

it's done?"



"Oh, I hope it wasn't because he is sick!  You don't think he is sick, do

you, ma?"



"Sick your granny; what's to make him sick?"



"Oh, there's never any telling.  These foreigners with that kind of names

are so delicate, and of course that kind of names are not suited to our

climate--you wouldn't expect it."





[And so-on and so-on, no end.  The time drags along; Thursday comes: the

boat arrives in a pouring storm toward midnight.]





At last there was a knock at the door and the anxious family jumped to

open it.  Two negro men entered, each carrying a trunk, and proceeded

upstairs toward the guest-room.  Then followed a stupefying apparition

--a double-headed human creature with four arms, one body, and a single

pair of legs!  It--or they, as you please--bowed with elaborate foreign

formality, but the Coopers could not respond immediately; they were

paralyzed.  At this moment there came from the rear of the group a

fervent ejaculation--"My lan'!"--followed by a crash of crockery, and the

slave-wench Nancy stood petrified and staring, with a tray of wrecked

tea-things at her feet.  The incident broke the spell, and brought the

family to consciousness.  The beautiful heads of the new-comer bowed

again, and one of them said with easy grace and dignity:



"I crave the honor, madam and miss, to introduce to you my brother, Count

Luigi Capello," (the other head bowed) "and myself--Count Angelo; and at

the same time offer sincere apologies for the lateness of our coming,

which was unavoidable," and both heads bowed again.



The poor old lady was in a whirl of amazement and confusion, but she

managed to stammer out:



"I'm sure I'm glad to make your acquaintance, sir--I mean, gentlemen.

As for the delay, it is nothing, don't mention it.  This is my daughter

Rowena, sir--gentlemen.  Please step into the parlor and sit down and

have a bite and sup; you are dreadful wet and must be uncomfortable

--both of you, I mean."



But to the old lady's relief they courteously excused themselves, saying

it would be wrong to keep the family out of their beds longer; then each

head bowed in turn and uttered a friendly good night, and the singular

figure moved away in the wake of Rowena's small brothers, who bore

candles, and disappeared up the stairs.



The widow tottered into the parlor and sank into a chair with a gasp,

and Rowena followed, tongue-tied and dazed.  The two sat silent in the

throbbing summer heat unconscious of the million-voiced music of the

mosquitoes, unconscious of the roaring gale, the lashing and thrashing of

the rain along the windows and the roof, the white glare of the

lightning, the tumultuous booming and bellowing of the thunder; conscious

of nothing but that prodigy, that uncanny apparition that had come and

gone so suddenly--that weird strange thing that was so soft-spoken and so

gentle of manner and yet had shaken them up like an earthquake with the

shock of its gruesome aspect.  At last a cold little shudder quivered

along down the widow's meager frame and she said in a weak voice:



"Ugh, it was awful just the mere look of that phillipene!"



Rowena did not answer.  Her faculties were still caked; she had not yet

found her voice.  Presently the widow said, a little resentfully:



"Always been used to sleeping together--in-fact, prefer it.  And I was

thinking it was to accommodate me.  I thought it was very good of them,

whereas a person situated as that young man is--"



"Ma, you oughtn't to begin by getting up a prejudice against him.

I'm sure he is good-hearted and means well.  Both of his faces show it."



"I'm not so certain about that.  The one on the left--I mean the one on

it's left--hasn't near as good a face, in my opinion, as its brother."



"That's Luigi."



"Yes, Luigi; anyway it's the dark-skinned one; the one that was west of

his brother when they stood in the door.  Up to all kinds of mischief and

disobedience when he was a boy, I'll be bound.  I lay his mother had

trouble to lay her hand on him when she wanted him.  But the one on the

right is as good as gold, I can see that."



"That's Angelo."



"Yes, Angelo, I reckon, though I can't tell t'other from which by their

names, yet awhile.  But it's the right-hand one--the blond one.  He has

such kind blue eyes, and curly copper hair and fresh complexion--"



"And such a noble face!--oh, it is a noble face, ma, just royal, you may

say!  And beautiful deary me, how beautiful!  But both are that; the dark

one's as beautiful as--a picture.  There's no such wonderful faces and

handsome heads in this town none that even begin.  And such hands,

especially Angelo's--so shapely and--"



"Stuff, how could you tell which they belonged to?--they had gloves on."



"Why, didn't I see them take off their hats?"



"That don't signify.  They might have taken off each other's hats.

Nobody could tell.  There was just a wormy squirming of arms in the air

--seemed to be a couple of dozen of them, all writhing at once, and it

just made me dizzy to see them go."



"Why, ma, I hadn't any difficulty.  There's two arms on each shoulder--"



"There, now.  One arm on each shoulder belongs to each of the creatures,

don't it?  For a person to have two arms on one shoulder wouldn't do him

any good, would it?  Of course not.  Each has an arm on each shoulder.

Now then, you tell me which of them belongs to which, if you can.  They

don't know, themselves--they just work whichever arm comes handy.  Of

course they do; especially if they are in a hurry and can't stop to think

which belongs to which."



The mother seemed to have the rights of the argument, so the daughter

abandoned the struggle.  Presently the widow rose with a yawn and said:



"Poor thing, I hope it won't catch cold; it was powerful wet, just

drenched, you may say.  I hope it has left its boots outside, so they can

be dried."



Then she gave a little start, and looked perplexed.



"Now I remember I heard one of them ask Joe to call him at half after

seven--I think it was the one on the left--no, it was the one to the east

of the other one--but I didn't hear the other one say any thing.  I

wonder if he wants to be called too.  Do you reckon it's too late to

ask?"



"Why, ma, it's not necessary.  Calling one is calling both.  If one gets

up, the other's got to."



"Sho, of course; I never thought of that.  Well, come along, maybe we can

get some sleep, but I don't know, I'm so shook up with what we've been

through."



The stranger had made an impression on the boys, too.  They had a word of

talk as they were getting to bed.  Henry, the gentle, the humane, said:



"I feel ever so sorry for it, don't you, Joe?"



But Joe was a boy of this world, active, enterprising, and had a

theatrical side to him:



"Sorry?  Why, how you talk!  It can't stir a step without attracting

attention.  It's just grand!"



Henry said, reproachfully:



"Instead of pitying it, Joe, you talk as if--"



"Talk as if what?  I know one thing mighty certain: if you can fix me so

I can eat for two and only have to stub toes for one, I ain't going to

fool away no such chance just for sentiment."



The twins were wet and tired, and they proceeded to undress without-any

preliminary remarks.  The abundance of sleeve made the partnership coat

hard to get off, for it was like skinning a tarantula; but it came at

last, after much tugging and perspiring.  The mutual vest followed.  Then

the brothers stood up before the glass, and each took off his own cravat

and collar.  The collars were of the standing kind, and came high up

under the ears, like the sides of a wheelbarrow, as required by the

fashion of the day.  The cravats were as broad as a bank-bill, with

fringed ends which stood far out to right and left like the wings of a

dragon-fly, and this also was strictly in accordance with the fashion of

the time.  Each cravat, as to color, was in perfect taste, so far as its

owner's complexion was concerned--a delicate pink, in the case of the

blond brother, a violent scarlet in the case of the brunette--but as a

combination they broke all the laws of taste known to civilization.

Nothing more fiendish and irreconcilable than those shrieking and

blaspheming colors could have been contrived, The wet boots gave no end

of trouble--to Luigi.  When they were off at last, Angelo said, with

bitterness:



"I wish you wouldn't wear such tight boots, they hurt my feet."



Luigi answered with indifference:



"My friend, when I am in command of our body, I choose my apparel

according to my own convenience, as I have remarked more than several

times already.  When you are in command, I beg you will do as you

please."



Angelo was hurt, and the tears came into his eyes.  There was gentle

reproach in his voice, but, not anger, when he replied:



"Luigi, I often consult your wishes, but you never consult mine.  When I

am in command I treat you as a guest; I try to make you feel at home;

when you are in command you treat me as an intruder, you make me feel

unwelcome.  It embarrasses me cruelly in company, for I can, see that

people notice it and comment on it."



"Oh, damn the people," responded the brother languidly, and with the air

of one who is tired of the subject.



A slight shudder shook the frame of Angelo, but he said nothing and the

conversation ceased.  Each buttoned his own share of the nightshirt in

silence; then Luigi, with Paine's Age of Reason in his hand, sat down in

one chair and put his feet in another and lit his pipe, while Angelo took

his Whole Duty of Man, and both began to read.  Angelo presently began to

cough; his coughing increased and became mixed with gaspings for breath,

and he was finally obliged to make an appeal to his brother's humanity:



"Luigi, if you would only smoke a little milder tobacco, I am sure I

could learn not to mind it in time, but this is so strong, and the pipe

is so rank that--"



"Angelo, I wouldn't be such a baby!  I have learned to smoke in a week,

and the trouble is already over with me; if you would try, you could

learn too, and then you would stop spoiling my comfort with your

everlasting complaints."



"Ah, brother, that is a strong word--everlasting--and isn't quite fair.

I only complain when I suffocate; you know I don't complain when we are

in the open air."



"Well, anyway, you could learn to smoke yourself."



"But my principles, Luigi, you forget my principles.  You would not have

me do a thing which I regard as a sin?"



"Oh, bosh!"



The conversation ceased again, for Angelo was sick and discouraged and

strangling; but after some time he closed his book and asked Luigi to

sing "From Greenland's Icy Mountains" with him, but he would not, and

when he tried to sing by himself Luigi did his best to drown his

plaintive tenor with a rude and rollicking song delivered in a thundering

bass.



After the singing there was silence, and neither brother was happy.

Before blowing the light out Luigi swallowed half a tumbler of whisky,

and Angelo, whose sensitive organization could not endure intoxicants of

any kind, took a pill to keep it from giving him the headache.









CHAPTER II



MA COOPER GETS ALL MIXED UP



The family sat in the breakfast-room waiting for the twins to come down.

The widow was quiet, the daughter was alive with happy excitement.  She

said:



"Ah, they're a boon, ma, just a boon! on't you think so?"



"Laws, I hope so, I don't know."



"Why, ma, yes you do.  They're so fine and handsome, and high-bred and

polite, so every way superior to our gawks here in this village; why,

they'll make life different from what it was--so humdrum and commonplace,

you know--oh, you may be sure they're full of accomplishments, and

knowledge of the world, and all that, that will be an immense advantage

to society here.  Don't you think so, ma?"



"Mercy on me, how should I know, and I've hardly set eyes on them yet."

After a pause she added, "They made considerable noise after they went

up."



"Noise?  Why, ma, they were singing!  And it was beautiful, too."



"Oh, it was well enough, but too mixed-up, seemed to me."



"Now, ma, honor bright, did you ever hear 'Greenland's Icy Mountains'

sung sweeter--now did you?"



"If it had been sung by itself, it would have been uncommon sweet, I

don't deny it; but what they wanted to mix it up with 'Old Bob Ridley'

for, I can't make out.  Why, they don't go together, at all.  They are

not of the same nature.  'Bob Ridley' is a common rackety slam-bang

secular song, one of the rippingest and rantingest and noisiest there is.

I am no judge of music, and I don't claim it, but in my opinion nobody

can make those two songs go together right."



"Why, ma, I thought--"



"It don't make any difference what you thought, it can't be done.  They

tried it, and to my mind it was a failure.  I never heard such a crazy

uproar; seemed to me, sometimes, the roof would come off; and as for the

cats--well, I've lived a many a year, and seen cats aggravated in more

ways than one, but I've never seen cats take on the way they took on last

night."



"Well, I don't think that that goes for anything, ma, because it is the

nature of cats that any sound that is unusual--"



"Unusual!  You may well call it so.  Now if they are going to sing duets

every night, I do hope they will both sing the same tune at the same

time, for in my opinion a duet that is made up of two different tunes is

a mistake; especially when the tunes ain't any kin to one another, that

way."



"But, ma, I think it must be a foreign custom; and it must be right too;

and the best way, because they have had every opportunity to know what is

right, and it don't stand to reason that with their education they would

do anything but what the highest musical authorities have sanctioned.

You can't help but admit that, ma."



The argument was formidably strong; the old lady could not find any way

around it; so, after thinking it over awhile she gave in with a sigh of

discontent, and admitted that the daughter's position was probably

correct.  Being vanquished, she had no mind to continue the topic at that

disadvantage, and was about to seek a change when a change came of

itself.  A footstep was heard on the stairs, and she said:



"There-he's coming!"



"They, ma--you ought to say they--it's nearer right."



The new lodger, rather shoutingly dressed but looking superbly handsome,

stepped with courtly carnage into the trim little breakfast-room and put

out all his cordial arms at once, like one of those pocket-knives with a

multiplicity of blades, and shook hands with the whole family

simultaneously.  He was so easy and pleasant and hearty that all

embarrassment presently thawed away and disappeared, and a cheery feeling

of friendliness and comradeship took its place.  He--or preferably they

--were asked to occupy the seat of honor at the foot of the table.  They

consented with thanks, and carved the beefsteak with one set of their

hands while they distributed it at the same time with the other set.



"Will you have coffee, gentlemen, or tea?"



"Coffee for Luigi, if you please, madam, tea for me."



"Cream and sugar?"



"For me, yes, madam; Luigi takes his coffee, black.  Our natures differ a

good deal from each other, and our tastes also."



The first time the negro girl Nancy appeared in the door and saw the two

heads turned in opposite directions and both talking at once, then saw

the commingling arms feed potatoes into one mouth and coffee into the

other at the same time, she had to pause and pull herself out of a

faintness that came over her; but after that she held her grip and was

able to wait on the table with fair courage.



Conversation fell naturally into the customary grooves.  It was a little

jerky, at first, because none of the family could get smoothly through a

sentence without a wabble in it here and a break there, caused by some

new surprise in the way of attitude or gesture on the part of the twins.

The weather suffered the most.  The weather was all finished up and

disposed of, as a subject, before the simple Missourians had gotten

sufficiently wonted to the spectacle of one body feeding two heads to

feel composed and reconciled in the presence of so bizarre a miracle.

And even after everybody's mind became tranquilized there was still one

slight distraction left: the hand that picked up a biscuit carried it to

the wrong head, as often as any other way, and the wrong mouth devoured

it.  This was a puzzling thing, and marred the talk a little.  It

bothered the widow to such a degree that she presently dropped out of the

conversation without knowing it, and fell to watching and guessing and

talking to herself:



"Now that hand is going to take that coffee to no, it's gone to the other

mouth; I can't understand it; and how, here is the dark-complected hand

with a potato in its fork, I'll see what goes with it--there, the

light-complected head's got it, as sure as I live!"



Finally Rowena said:



"Ma, what is the matter with you?  Are you dreaming about something?"



The old lady came to herself and blushed; then she explained with the

first random thing that came into her mind: "I saw Mr. Angelo take up Mr.

Luigi's coffee, and I thought maybe he--sha'n't I give you a cup, Mr.

Angelo?"



"Oh no, madam, I am very much obliged, but I never drink coffee, much as

I would like to.  You did see me take up Luigi's cup, it is true, but if

you noticed, I didn't carry it to my mouth, but to his."



"Y-es, I thought you did: Did you mean to?"



"How?"



The widow was a little embarrassed again.  She said:



"I don't know but what I'm foolish, and you mustn't mind; but you see,

he got the coffee I was expecting to see you drink, and you got a potato

that I thought he was going to get.  So I thought it might be a mistake

all around, and everybody getting what wasn't intended for him."



Both twins laughed and Luigi said:



"Dear madam, there wasn't any mistake.  We are always helping each other

that way.  It is a great economy for us both; it saves time and labor.

We have a system of signs which nobody can notice or understand but

ourselves.  If I am using both my hands and want some coffee, I make the

sign and Angelo furnishes it to me; and you saw that when he needed a

potato I delivered it."



"How convenient!"



"Yes, and often of the extremest value.  Take the Mississippi boats, for

instance.  They are always overcrowded.  There is table-room for only

half of the passengers, therefore they have to set a second table for the

second half.  The stewards rush both parties, they give them no time to

eat a satisfying meal, both divisions leave the table hungry.  It isn't

so with us.  Angelo books himself for the one table, I book myself for

the other.  Neither of us eats anything at the other's table, but just

simply works--works.  Thus, you see there are four hands to feed Angelo,

and the same four to feed me.  Each of us eats two meals."



The old lady was dazed with admiration, and kept saying, "It is perfectly

wonderful, perfectly wonderful" and the boy Joe licked his chops

enviously, but said nothing--at least aloud.



"Yes," continued Luigi, "our construction may have its disadvantages--in

fact, has but it also has its compensations of one sort and another. Take

travel, for instance.  Travel is enormously expensive, in all countries;

we have been obliged to do a vast deal of it--come, Angelo, don't put any

more sugar in your tea, I'm just over one indigestion and don't want

another right away--been obliged to do a deal of it, as I was saying.

Well, we always travel as one person, since we occupy but one seat; so we

save half the fare."



"How romantic!" interjected Rowena, with effusion.



"Yes, my dear young lady, and how practical too, and economical.  In

Europe, beds in the hotels are not charged with the board, but

separately--another saving, for we stood to our rights and paid for the

one bed only.  The landlords often insisted that as both of us occupied

the bed we ought--"



"No, they didn't," said Angelo.  "They did it only twice, and in both

cases it was a double bed--a rare thing in Europe--and the double bed

gave them some excuse.  Be fair to the landlords; twice doesn't

constitute 'often.'"



"Well, that depends--that depends.  I knew a man who fell down a well

twice.  He said he didn't mind the first time, but he thought the second

time was once too often.  Have I misused that word, Mrs. Cooper?"



"To tell the truth, I was afraid you had, but it seems to look, now, like

you hadn't."  She stopped, and was evidently struggling with the

difficult problem a moment, then she added in the tone of one who is

convinced without being converted, "It seems so, but I can't somehow tell

why."



Rowena thought Luigi's retort was wonderfully quick and bright, and she

remarked to herself with satisfaction that there wasn't any young native

of Dawson's Landing that could have risen to the occasion like that.

Luigi detected the applause in her face, and expressed his pleasure and

his thanks with his eyes; and so eloquently withal, that the girl was

proud and pleased, and hung out the delicate sign of it on her cheeks.

Luigi went on, with animation:



"Both of us get a bath for one ticket, theater seat for one ticket,

pew-rent is on the same basis, but at peep-shows we pay double."



"We have much to' be thankful for," said Angelo, impressively, with a

reverent light in his eye and a reminiscent tone in his voice, "we have

been greatly blessed.  As a rule, what one of us has lacked, the other,

by the bounty of Providence, has been able to supply.  My brother is

hardy, I am not; he is very masculine, assertive, aggressive; I am much

less so.  I am subject to illness, he is never ill.  I cannot abide

medicines, and cannot take them, but he has no prejudice against them,

and--"



"Why, goodness gracious," interrupted the widow, "when you are sick, does

he take the medicine for you?"



"Always, madam."



"Why, I never heard such a thing in my life!  I think it's beautiful of

you."



"Oh, madam, it's nothing, don't mention it, it's really nothing at all."



"But I say it's beautiful, and I stick to it!" cried the widow, with a

speaking moisture in her eye.



"A well brother to take the medicine for his poor sick brother--I wish I

had such a son," and she glanced reproachfully at her boys.  "I declare

I'll never rest till I've shook you by the hand," and she scrambled out

of her chair in a fever of generous enthusiasm, and made for the twins,

blind with her tears, and began to shake.  The boy Joe corrected her:

"You're shaking the wrong one, ma."



This flurried her, but she made a swift change and went on shaking.



"Got the wrong one again, ma," said the boy.



"Oh, shut up, can't you!" said the widow, embarrassed and irritated.

"Give me all your hands, I want to shake them all; for I know you are

both just as good as you can be."



It was a victorious thought, a master-stroke of diplomacy, though that

never occurred to her and she cared nothing for diplomacy.  She shook the

four hands in turn cordially, and went back to her place in a state of

high and fine exultation that made her look young and handsome.



"Indeed I owe everything to Luigi," said Angelo, affectionately.

"But for him I could not have survived our boyhood days, when we were

friendless and poor--ah, so poor!  We lived from hand to mouth-lived on

the coarse fare of unwilling charity, and for weeks and weeks together

not a morsel of food passed my lips, for its character revolted me and I

could not eat it.  But for Luigi I should have died.  He ate for us

both."



"How noble!" sighed Rowena.



"Do you hear that?" said the widow, severely, to her boys.  "Let it be an

example to you--I mean you, Joe."



Joe gave his head a barely perceptible disparaging toss and said: "Et for

both.  It ain't anything I'd 'a' done it."



"Hush, if you haven't got any better manners than that.  You don't see

the point at all.  It wasn't good food."



"I don't care--it was food, and I'd 'a' et it if it was rotten."



"Shame!  Such language!  Can't you understand?  They were starving

--actually starving--and he ate for both, and--"



"Shucks! you gimme a chance and I'll--"



"There, now--close your head! and don't you open it again till you're

asked."



     [Angelo goes on and tells how his parents the Count and Countess had

     to fly from Florence for political reasons, and died poor in Berlin

     bereft of their great property by confiscation; and how he and Luigi

     had to travel with a freak-show during two years and suffer

     semi-starvation.]



"That hateful black-bread; but I seldom ate anything during that time;

that was poor Luigi's affair--"



"I'll never Mister him again!" cried the widow, with strong emotion,

"he's Luigi to me, from this out!"



"Thank you a thousand times, madam, a thousand times! though in truth I

don't deserve it."



"Ah, Luigi is always the fortunate one when honors are showering," said

Angelo, plaintively; "now what have I done, Mrs.  Cooper, that you leave

me out?  Come, you must strain a point in my favor."



"Call you Angelo?  Why, certainly I will; what are you thinking of!  In

the case of twins, why--"



"But, ma, you're breaking up the story--do let him go on."



"You keep still, Rowena Cooper, and he can go on all the better, I

reckon.  One interruption don't hurt, it's two that makes the trouble."



"But you've added one, now, and that is three."



"Rowena!  I will not allow you to talk back at me when you have got

nothing rational to say."









CHAPTER III



ANGELO IS BLUE



[After breakfast the whole village crowded in, and there was a grand

reception in honor of the twins; and at the close of it the gifted

"freak" captured everybody's admiration by sitting down at the piano and

knocking out a classic four-handed piece in great style.  Then the judge

took it--or them--driving in his buggy and showed off his village.]



All along the streets the people crowded the windows and stared at the

amazing twins.  Troops of small boys flocked after the buggy, excited and

yelling.  At first the dogs showed no interest.  They thought they merely

saw three men in a buggy--a matter of no consequence; but when they found

out the facts of the case, they altered their opinion pretty radically,

and joined the boys, expressing their minds as they came.  Other dogs got

interested; indeed, all the dogs.  It was a spirited sight to see them

come leaping fences, tearing around corners, swarming out of every

bystreet and alley.  The noise they made was something beyond belief

--or praise.  They did not seem to be moved by malice but only by

prejudice, the common human prejudice against lack of conformity.  If the

twins turned their heads, they broke and fled in every direction, but

stopped at a safe distance and faced about; and then formed and came on

again as soon as the strangers showed them their back.  Negroes and

farmers' wives took to the woods when the buggy came upon them suddenly,

and altogether the drive was pleasant and animated, and a refreshment all

around.



     [It was a long and lively drive.  Angelo was a Methodist, Luigi was

     a Free-thinker.  The judge was very proud of his Freethinkers'

     Society, which was flourishing along in a most prosperous way and

     already had two members--himself and the obscure and neglected

     Pudd'nhead Wilson.  It was to meet that evening, and he invited

     Luigi to join; a thing which Luigi was glad to do, partly because it

     would please himself, and partly because it would gravel Angelo.]



They had now arrived at the widow's gate, and the excursion was ended.

The twins politely expressed their obligations for the pleasant outing

which had been afforded them; to which the judge bowed his thanks,

and then said he would now go and arrange for the Free-thinkers' meeting,

and would call for Count Luigi in the evening.



"For you also, dear sir," he added hastily, turning to Angelo and bowing.

"In addressing myself particularly to your brother, I was not meaning to

leave you out.  It was an unintentional rudeness, I assure you, and due

wholly to accident--accident and preoccupation.  I beg you to forgive

me."



His quick eye had seen the sensitive blood mount into Angelo's face,

betraying the wound that had been inflicted.  The sting of the slight had

gone deep, but the apology was so prompt, and so evidently sincere, that

the hurt was almost immediately healed, and a forgiving smile testified

to the kindly judge that all was well again.



Concealed behind Angelo's modest and unassuming exterior, and unsuspected

by any but his intimates, was a lofty pride, a pride of almost abnormal

proportions, indeed, and this rendered him ever the prey of slights; and

although they were almost always imaginary ones, they hurt none the less

on that account.  By ill fortune judge Driscoll had happened to touch his

sorest point, i.e., his conviction that his brother's presence was

welcomer everywhere than his own; that he was often invited, out of mere

courtesy, where only his brother was wanted, and that in a majority of

cases he would not be included in an invitation if he could be left out

without offense.  A sensitive nature like this is necessarily subject to

moods; moods which traverse the whole gamut of feeling; moods which know

all the climes of emotion, from the sunny heights of joy to the black

abysses of despair.  At times, in his seasons of deepest depressions,

Angelo almost wished that he and his brother might become segregated from

each other and be separate individuals, like other men.  But of course as

soon as his mind cleared and these diseased imaginings passed away, he

shuddered at the repulsive thought, and earnestly prayed that it might

visit him no more.  To be separate, and as other men are!  How awkward it

would seem; how unendurable.  What would he do with his hands, his arms?

How would his legs feel?  How odd, and strange, and grotesque every

action, attitude, movement, gesture would be.  To sleep by himself, eat

by himself, walk by himself--how lonely, how unspeakably lonely!  No, no,

any fate but that.  In every way and from every point, the idea was

revolting.



This was of course natural; to have felt otherwise would have been

unnatural.  He had known no life but a combined one; he had been familiar

with it from his birth; he was not able to conceive of any other as being

agreeable, or even bearable.  To him, in the privacy of his secret

thoughts, all other men were monsters, deformities: and during

three-fourths of his life their aspect had filled him with what promised

to be an unconquerable aversion.  But at eighteen his eye began to take

note of female beauty; and little by little, undefined longings grew up

in his heart, under whose softening influences the old stubborn aversion

gradually diminished, and finally disappeared.  Men were still

monstrosities to him, still deformities, and in his sober moments he had

no desire to be like them, but their strange and unsocial and uncanny

construction was no longer offensive to him.



This had been a hard day for him, physically and mentally.  He had been

called in the morning before he had quite slept off the effects of the

liquor which Luigi had drunk; and so, for the first half-hour had had the

seedy feeling, and languor, the brooding depression, the cobwebby mouth

and druggy taste that come of dissipation and are so ill a preparation

for bodily or intellectual activities; the long violent strain of the

reception had followed; and this had been followed, in turn, by the

dreary sight-seeing, the judge's wearying explanations and laudations of

the sights, and the stupefying clamor of the dogs.  As a congruous

conclusion, a fitting end, his feelings had been hurt, a slight had been

put upon him.  He would have been glad to forego dinner and betake

himself to rest and sleep, but he held his peace and said no word, for he

knew his brother, Luigi, was fresh, unweary, full of life, spirit,

energy; he would have scoffed at the idea of wasting valuable time on a

bed or a sofa, and would have refused permission.









CHAPTER IV



SUPERNATURAL CHRONOMETRY



Rowena was dining out, Joe and Harry were belated at play, there

were but three chairs and four persons that noon at the home

dinner-table--the twins, the widow, and her chum, Aunt Betsy Hale.  The

widow soon perceived that Angelo's spirits were as low as Luigi's were

high, and also that he had a jaded look.  Her motherly solicitude was

aroused, and she tried to get him interested in the talk and win him

to a happier frame of mind, but the cloud of sadness remained on his

countenance. Luigi lent his help, too.  He used a form and a phrase which

he was always accustomed to employ in these circumstances.  He gave his

brother an affectionate slap on the shoulder and said, encouragingly:



"Cheer up, the worst is yet to come!"



But this did no good.  It never did.  If anything, it made the matter

worse, as a rule, because it irritated Angelo.  This made it a favorite

with Luigi.  By and by the widow said:



"Angelo, you are tired, you've overdone yourself; you go right to bed

after dinner, and get a good nap and a rest, then you'll be all right."



"Indeed, I would give anything if I could do that, madam."



"And what's to hender, I'd like to know?  Land, the room's yours to do

what you please with!  The idea that you can't do what you like with your

own!"



"But, you see, there's one prime essential--an essential of the very

first importance--which isn't my own."



"What is that?"



"My body."



The old ladies looked puzzled, and Aunt Betsy Hale said:



"Why bless your heart, how is that?"



"It's my brother's."



"Your brother's!  I don't quite understand.  I supposed it belonged to

both of you."



"So it does.  But not to both at the same time."



"That is mighty curious; I don't see how it can be.  I shouldn't think it

could be managed that way."



"Oh, it's a good enough arrangement, and goes very well; in fact, it

wouldn't do to have it otherwise.  I find that the teetotalers and the

anti-teetotalers hire the use of the same hall for their meetings.  Both

parties don't use it at the same time, do they?"



"You bet they don't!" said both old ladies in a breath.



"And, moreover," said Aunt Betsy, "the Freethinkers and the Baptist Bible

class use the same room over the Market house, but you can take my word

for it they don't mush up together and use it at the same time.'



"Very well," said Angelo, "you understand it now.  And it stands to

reason that the arrangement couldn't be improved.  I'll prove it to you.

If our legs tried to obey two wills, how could we ever get anywhere?

I would start one way, Luigi would start another, at the same moment

--the result would be a standstill, wouldn't it?"



"As sure as you are born!  Now ain't that wonderful!  A body would never

have thought of it."



"We should always be arguing and fussing and disputing over the merest

trifles.  We should lose worlds of time, for we couldn't go down-stairs

or up, couldn't go to bed, couldn't rise, couldn't wash, couldn't dress,

couldn't stand up, couldn't sit down, couldn't even cross our legs,

without calling a meeting first and explaining the case and passing

resolutions, and getting consent.  It wouldn't ever do--now would it?"



"Do?  Why, it would wear a person out in a week!  Did you ever hear

anything like it, Patsy Cooper?"



"Oh, you'll find there's more than one thing about them that ain't

commonplace," said the widow, with the complacent air of a person with a

property right in a novelty that is under admiring scrutiny.



"Well, now, how ever do you manage it?  I don't mind saying I'm suffering

to know."



"He who made us," said Angelo reverently, "and with us this difficulty,

also provided a way out of it.  By a mysterious law of our being, each of

us has utter and indisputable command of our body a week at a time, turn

and turn about."



"Well, I never!  Now ain't that beautiful!"



"Yes, it is beautiful and infinitely wise and just.  The week ends every

Saturday at midnight to the minute, to the second, to the last shade of

a fraction of a second, infallibly, unerringly, and in that instant the

one brother's power over the body vanishes and the other brother takes

possession, asleep or awake."



"How marvelous are His ways, and past finding out!"



Luigi said: "So exactly to the instant does the change come, that during

our stay in many of the great cities of the world, the public clocks were

regulated by it; and as hundreds of thousands of private clocks and

watches were set and corrected in accordance with the public clocks, we

really furnished the standard time for the entire city."



"Don't tell me that He don't do miracles any more!  Blowing down the

walls of Jericho with rams' horns wa'n't as difficult, in my opinion."



"And that is not all," said Angelo.  "A thing that is even more

marvelous, perhaps, is the fact that the change takes note of longitude

and fits itself to the meridian we are on.  Luigi is in command this

week.  Now, if on Saturday night at a moment before midnight we could fly

in an instant to a point fifteen degrees west of here, he would hold

possession of the power another hour, for the change observes local time

and no other."



Betsy Hale was deeply impressed, and said with solemnity:



"Patsy Cooper, for detail it lays over the Passage of the Red Sea."



"Now, I shouldn't go as far as that," said Aunt Patsy, "but if you've a

mind to say Sodom and Gomorrah, I am with you, Betsy Hale."



"I am agreeable, then, though I do think I was right, and I believe

Parson Maltby would say the same.  Well, now, there's another thing.

Suppose one of you wants to borrow the legs a minute from the one that's

got them, could he let him?"



"Yes, but we hardly ever do that.  There were disagreeable results,

several times, and so we very seldom ask or grant the privilege,

nowadays, and we never even think of such a thing unless the case is

extremely urgent.  Besides, a week's possession at a time seems so little

that we can't bear to spare a minute of it.  People who have the use of

their legs all the time never think of what a blessing it is, of course.

It never occurs to them; it's just their natural ordinary condition,

and so it does not excite them at all.  But when I wake up, on Sunday

morning, and it's my week and I feel the power all through me, oh, such a

wave of exultation and thanksgiving goes surging over me, and I want to

shout 'I can walk!  I can walk!'  Madam, do you ever, at your uprising,

want to shout 'I can walk!  I can walk!'?"



"No, you poor unfortunate cretur', but I'll never get out of my bed again

without doing it!  Laws, to think I've had this unspeakable blessing all

my long life and never had the grace to thank the good Lord that gave it

to me!"



Tears stood in the eyes of both the old ladies and the widow said,

softly:



"Betsy Hale, we have learned something, you and me."



The conversation now drifted wide, but by and by floated back once more

to that admired detail, the rigid and beautiful impartiality with which

the possession of power had been distributed, between the twins.  Aunt

Betsy saw in it a far finer justice than human law exhibits in related

cases.  She said:



"In my opinion it ain't right no, and never has been right, the way a

twin born a quarter of a minute sooner than the other one gets all the

land and grandeurs and nobilities in the old countries and his brother

has to go bare and be a nobody.  Which of you was born first?"



Angelo's head was resting against Luigi's; weariness had overcome him,

and for the past five minutes he had been peacefully sleeping.  The old

ladies had dropped their voices to a lulling drone, to help him to steal

the rest his brother wouldn't take him up-stairs to get.  Luigi listened

a moment to Angelo's regular breathing, then said in a voice barely

audible:



"We were both born at the same time, but I am six months older than he

is."



"For the land's sake!"



"'Sh! on't wake him up; he wouldn't like my telling this.  It has

always been kept secret till now."



"But how in the world can it be?  If you were both born at the same time,

how can one of you be older than the other?"



"It is very simple, and I assure you it is true.  I was born with a full

crop of hair, he was as bald as an egg for six months.  I could walk six

months before he could make a step.  I finished teething six months ahead

of him.  I began to take solids six months before he left the breast.

I began to talk six months before he could say a word.  Last, and

absolutely unassailable proof, the sutures in my skull closed six months

ahead of his.  Always just that six months' difference to a day.  Was

that accident?  Nobody is going to claim that, I'm sure.  It was ordained

it was law it had its meaning, and we know what that meaning was.  Now

what does this overwhelming body of evidence establish?  It establishes

just one thing, and that thing it establishes beyond any peradventure

whatever.  Friends, we would not have it known for the world, and I must

beg you to keep it strictly to yourselves, but the truth is, we are no

more twins than you are."



The two old ladies were stunned, paralyzed-petrified, one may almost say

--and could only sit and gaze vacantly at each other for some moments;

then Aunt Betsy Hale said impressively:



"There's no getting around proof like that.  I do believe it's the most

amazing thing I ever heard of."  She sat silent a moment or two and

breathing hard with excitement, then she looked up and surveyed the

strangers steadfastly a little while, and added: "Well, it does beat me,

but I would have took you for twins anywhere."



"So would I, so would I," said Aunt Patsy with the emphasis of a

certainty that is not impaired by any shade of doubt.



"Anybody would-anybody in the world, I don't care who he is," said Aunt

Betsy with decision.



"You won't tell," said Luigi, appealingly.



"Oh, dear, no!" answered both ladies promptly, "you can trust us, don't

you be afraid."



"That is good of you, and kind.  Never let on; treat us always as if we

were twins."



"You can depend on us," said Aunt Betsy, "but it won't be easy, because

now that I know you ain't you don't seem so."



Luigi muttered to himself with satisfaction: "That swindle has gone

through without change of cars."



It was not very kind of him to load the poor things up with a secret like

that, which would be always flying to their tongues' ends every time they

heard any one speak of the strangers as twins, and would become harder

and harder to hang on to with every recurrence of the temptation to tell

it, while the torture of retaining it would increase with every new

strain that was applied; but he never thought of that, and probably would

not have worried much about it if he had.



A visitor was announced--some one to see the twins.  They withdrew to the

parlor, and the two old ladies began to discuss with interest the strange

things which they had been listening to.  When they had finished the

matter to their satisfaction, and Aunt Betsy rose to go, she stopped to

ask a question:



"How does things come on between Roweny and Tom Driscoll?"



"Well, about the same.  He writes tolerable often, and she answers

tolerable seldom."



"Where is he?"



"In St. Louis, I believe, though he's such a gadabout that a body can't

be very certain of him, I reckon."



"Don't Roweny know?"



"Oh, yes, like enough.  I haven't asked her lately."



"Do you know how him and the judge are getting along now?"



"First rate, I believe.  Mrs. Pratt says so; and being right in the

house, and sister to the one and aunt to t'other, of course she ought to

know.  She says the judge is real fond of him when he's away; but frets

when he's around and is vexed with his ways, and not sorry to have him go

again.  He has been gone three weeks this time--a pleasant thing for both

of them, I reckon."



"Tom's rather harum-scarum, but there ain't anything bad in him, I

guess."



"Oh, no, he's just young, that's all.  Still, twenty-three is old, in one

way.  A young man ought to be earning his living by that time.  If Tom

were doing that, or was even trying to do it, the judge would be a heap

better satisfied with him.  Tom's always going to begin, but somehow he

can't seem to find just the opening he likes."



"Well, now, it's partly the judge's own fault.  Promising the boy his

property wasn't the way to set him to earning a fortune of his own.  But

what do you think is Roweny beginning to lean any toward him, or ain't

she?"



Aunt Patsy had a secret in her bosom; she wanted to keep it there, but

nature was too strong for her.  She drew Aunt Betsy aside, and said in

her most confidential and mysterious manner:



"Don't you breathe a syllable to a soul--I'm going to tell you something.

In my opinion Tom Driscoll's chances were considerable better yesterday

than they are to-day."



"Patsy Cooper, what do you mean?"



"It's so, as sure as you're born.  I wish you could 'a' been at breakfast

and seen for yourself."



"You don't mean it!"



"Well, if I'm any judge, there's a leaning--there's a leaning, sure."



"My land!  Which one of 'em is it?"



"I can't say for certain, but I think it's the youngest one--Anjy."



Then there were hand-shakings, and congratulations, and hopes, and so on,

and the old ladies parted, perfectly happy--the one in knowing something

which the rest of the town didn't, and the other in having been the sole

person able to furnish that knowledge.



The visitor who had called to see the twins was the Rev. Mr. Hotchkiss,

pastor of the Baptist church.  At the reception Angelo had told him he

had lately experienced a change in his religious views, and was now

desirous of becoming a Baptist, and would immediately join Mr.

Hotchkiss's church.  There was no time to say more, and the brief talk

ended at that point.  The minister was much gratified, and had dropped in

for a moment now, to invite the twins to attend his Bible class at eight

that evening.  Angelo accepted, and was expecting Luigi to decline, but

he did not, because he knew that the Bible class and the Freethinkers met

in the same room, and he wanted to treat his brother to the embarrassment

of being caught in free-thinking company.









CHAPTER V



GUILT AND INNOCENCE FINELY BLENT



[A long and vigorous quarrel follows, between the twins.  And there is

plenty to quarrel about, for Angelo was always seeking truth, and this

obliged him to change and improve his religion with frequency, which

wearied Luigi, and annoyed him too; for he had to be present at each new

enlistment--which placed him in the false position of seeming to indorse

and approve his brother's fickleness; moreover, he had to go to Angelo's

prohibition meetings, and he hated them.  On the other hand, when it was

his week to command the legs he gave Angelo just cause of complaint, for

he took him to circuses and horse-races and fandangoes, exposing him to

all sorts of censure and criticism; and he drank, too; and whatever he

drank went to Angelo's head instead of his own and made him act

disgracefully.  When the evening was come, the two attended the

Free-thinkers' meeting, where Angelo was sad and silent; then came the

Bible class and looked upon him coldly, finding him in such company.

Then they went to Wilson's house and Chapter XI of Pudd'nhead Wilson

follows, which tells of the girl seen in Tom Driscoll's room; and closes

with the kicking of Tom by Luigi at the anti-temperance mass-meeting of

the Sons of Liberty; with the addition of some account of Roxy's

adventures as a chamber-maid on a Mississippi boat.  Her exchange of the

children had been flippantly and farcically described in an earlier

chapter.]



Next morning all the town was a-buzz with great news; Pudd'nhead Wilson

had a law case!  The, public astonishment was so great and the public

curiosity so intense, that when the justice of the peace opened his

court, the place was packed with people and even the windows were full.

Everybody was, flushed and perspiring; the summer heat was almost

unendurable.



Tom Driscoll had brought a charge of assault and battery against the

twins.  Robert Allen was retained by Driscoll, David Wilson by the

defense.  Tom, his native cheerfulness unannihilated by his back-breaking

and bone-bruising passage across the massed heads of the Sons of Liberty

the previous night, laughed his little customary laugh, and said to

Wilson:



"I've kept my promise, you see; I'm throwing my business your way.

Sooner than I was expecting, too."



"It's very good of you--particularly if you mean to keep it up."



"Well, I can't tell about that yet.  But we'll see.  If I find you

deserve it I'll take you under my protection and make your fame and

fortune for you."



"I'll try to deserve it, Tom."



A jury was sworn in; then Mr.  Allen said:



"We will detain your honor but a moment with this case.  It is not one

where any doubt of the fact of the assault can enter in.  These

gentlemen--the accused--kicked my client at the Market Hall last night;

they kicked him with violence; with extraordinary violence; with even

unprecedented violence, I may say; insomuch that he was lifted entirely

off his feet and discharged into the midst of the audience.  We can prove

this by four hundred witnesses--we shall call but three.  Mr. Harkness

will take the stand."



Mr. Harkness, being sworn, testified that he was chairman upon the

occasion mentioned; that he was close at hand and saw the defendants in

this action kick the plaintiff into the air and saw him descend among the

audience.



"Take the witness," said Allen.



"Mr. Harkness," said Wilson, "you say you saw these gentlemen, my

clients, kick the plaintiff.  Are you sure--and please remember that you

are on oath--are you perfectly sure that you saw both of them kick him,

or only one?  Now be careful."



A bewildered look began to spread itself over the witness's face.  He

hesitated, stammered, but got out nothing.  His eyes wandered to the

twins and fixed themselves there with a vacant gaze.



"Please answer, Mr.  Harkness, you are keeping the court waiting.  It is

a very simple question."



Counsel for the prosecution broke in with impatience:



"Your honor, the question is an irrelevant triviality.  Necessarily, they

both kicked him, for they have but the one pair of legs, and both are

responsible for them."



Wilson said, sarcastically:



"Will your honor permit this new witness to be sworn?  He seems to

possess knowledge which can be of the utmost value just at this moment

--knowledge which would at once dispose of what every one must see is a

very difficult question in this case.  Brother Allen, will you take the

stand?"



"Go on with your case!" said Allen, petulantly.  The audience laughed,

and got a warning from the court.



"Now, Mr. Harkness," said Wilson, insinuatingly, "we shall have to insist

upon an answer to that question."



"I--er--well, of course, I do not absolutely know, but in my opinion--"



"Never mind your opinion, sir--answer the question."



"I--why, I can't answer it."



"That will do, Mr.  Harkness.  Stand down."



The audience tittered, and the discomfited witness retired in a state of

great embarrassment.



Mr. Wakeman took the stand and swore that he saw the twins kick the

plaintiff off the platform.



The defense took the witness.



"Mr. Wakeman, you have sworn that you saw these gentlemen kick the

plaintiff.  Do I understand you to swear that you saw them both do it?"



"Yes, sir,"--with derision.



"How do you know that both did it?"



"Because I saw them do it."



The audience laughed, and got another warning from the court.



"But by what means do you know that both, and not one, did it?"



"Well, in the first place, the insult was given to both of them equally,

for they were called a pair of scissors.  Of course they would both want

to resent it, and so--"



"Wait!  You are theorizing now.  Stick to facts--counsel will attend to

the arguments.  Go on."



"Well, they both went over there--that I saw."



"Very good.  Go on."



"And they both kicked him--I swear to it."



"Mr. Wakeman, was Count Luigi, here, willing to join the Sons of Liberty

last night?"



"Yes, sir, he was.  He did join, too, and drank a glass or two of whisky,

like a man."



"Was his brother willing to join?"



"No, sir, he wasn't.  He is a teetotaler, and was elected through a

mistake."



"Was he given a glass of whisky?"



"Yes, sir, but of course that was another mistake, and not intentional.

He wouldn't drink it.  He set it down."  A slight pause, then he added,

casually and quite simply: "The plaintiff reached for it and hogged it."



There was a fine outburst of laughter, but as the justice was caught out

himself, his reprimand was not very vigorous.



Mr. Allen jumped up and exclaimed: "I protest against these foolish

irrelevancies.  What have they to do with the case?"



Wilson said: "Calm yourself, brother, it was only an experiment.  Now,

Mr. Wakeman, if one of these gentlemen chooses to join an association and

the other doesn't; and if one of them enjoys whisky and the other

doesn't, but sets it aside and leaves it unprotected" (titter from the

audience), "it seems to show that they have independent minds, and

tastes, and preferences, and that one of them is able to approve of a

thing at the very moment that the other is heartily disapproving of it.

Doesn't it seem so to you?"



"Certainly it does.  It's perfectly plain."



"Now, then, it might be--I only say it might be--that one of these

brothers wanted to kick the plaintiff last night, and that the other

didn't want that humiliating punishment inflicted upon him in that public

way and before all those people.  Isn't that possible?"



"Of course it is.  It's more than possible.  I don't believe the blond

one would kick anybody.  It was the other one that--"



"Silence!" shouted the plaintiff's counsel, and went on with an angry

sentence which was lost in the wave of laughter that swept the house.



"That will do, Mr.  Wakeman," said Wilson, "you may stand down."



The third witness was called.  He had seen the twins kick the plaintiff.

Mr. Wilson took the witness.



"Mr. Rogers, you say you saw these accused gentlemen kick the plaintiff?"



"Yes, sir."



"Both of them?"



"Yes, sir."



"Which of them kicked him first?"



"Why--they--they both kicked him at the same time.



"Are you perfectly sure of that?"



"Yes, sir."



"What makes you sure of it?"



"Why, I stood right behind them, and saw them do it."



"How many kicks were delivered?"



"Only one."



"If two men kick, the result should be two kicks, shouldn't it?"



"Why--why yes, as a rule."



"Then what do you think went with the other kick?"



"I--well--the fact is, I wasn't thinking of two being necessary, this

time."



"What do you think now?"



"Well, I--I'm sure I don't quite know what to think, but I reckon that

one of them did half of the kick and the other one did the other half."



Somebody in the crowd sung out: "It's the first sane thing that any of

them has said."



The audience applauded.  The judge said: "Silence! or I will clear the

court."



Mr. Allen looked pleased, but Wilson did not seem disturbed.  He said:



"Mr. Rogers, you have favored us with what you think and what you reckon,

but as thinking and reckoning are not evidence, I will now give you a

chance to come out with something positive, one way or the other, and

shall require you to produce it.  I will ask the accused to stand up and

repeat the phenomenal kick of last night."  The twins stood up.  "Now,

Mr. Rogers, please stand behind them."



A Voice: "No, stand in front!" (Laughter.  Silenced by the court.)

Another Voice:  "No, give Tommy another highst!"  (Laughter.  Sharply

rebuked by the court.)



"Now, then, Mr. Rogers, two kicks shall be delivered, one after the

other, and I give you my word that at least one of the two shall be

delivered by one of the twins alone, without the slightest assistance

from his brother.  Watch sharply, for you have of to render a decision

without any if's and ands it."  Rogers bent himself behind the twins with

palms just above his knees, in the modern attitude of the catcher at a

baseball match, and riveted eyes on the pair of legs in front of him.



"Are you ready, Mr.  Rogers?"



"Ready sir."



The kick, launched.



"Have you got that one classified, Mr.  Rogers?"



"Let me study a minute, sir."



"Take as much time as you please.  Let me know when you are ready."



For as much as a minute Rogers pondered, with all eyes and a breathless

interest fastened upon him.  Then he gave the word: "Ready, sir."



"Kick!"



The kick that followed was an exact duplicate of the first one.



"Now, then, Mr.  Rogers, one of those kicks was an individual kick, not a

mutual one.  You will now state positively which was the mutual one."



The witness said, with a crestfallen look:



"I've got to give it up.  There ain't any man in the world that could

tell t'other from which, sir."



"Do you still assert that last night's kick was a mutual kick?"



"Indeed, I don't, sir."



"That will do, Mr.  Rogers.  If my brother Allen desires to address the

court, your honor, very well; but as far as I am concerned I am ready to

let the case be at once delivered into the hands of this intelligent jury

without comment."



Mr.  Justice Robinson had been in office only two months, and in that

short time had not had many cases to try, of course.  He had no knowledge

of laws and courts except what he had picked up since he came into

office.  He was a sore trouble to the lawyers, for his rulings were

pretty eccentric sometimes, and he stood by them with Roman simplicity

and fortitude; but the people were well satisfied with him, for they saw

that his intentions were always right, that he was entirely impartial,

and that he usually made up in good sense what he lacked in technique,

so to speak.  He now perceived that there was likely to be a miscarriage

of justice here, and he rose to the occasion.



"Wait a moment, gentlemen," he said, "it is plain that an assault has

been committed it is plain to anybody; but the way things are going, the

guilty will certainly escape conviction.  I can not allow this.  Now---"



"But, your honor!" said Wilson, interrupting him, earnestly but

respectfully, "you are deciding the case yourself, whereas the jury--"



"Never mind the jury, Mr. Wilson; the jury will have a chance when there

is a reasonable doubt for them to take hold of--which there isn't,

so far.  There is no doubt whatever that an assault has been committed.

The attempt to show that both of the accused committed it has failed.

Are they both to escape justice on that account?  Not in this court,

if I can prevent it.  It appears to have been a mistake to bring the

charge against them as a corporation; each should have been charged in

his capacity as an individual, and--"



"But, your honor!" said Wilson, "in fairness to my clients I must insist

that inasmuch as the prosecution 'd not separate the--"



"No wrong will be done your clients, sir--they will be protected;

also the public and the offended laws.  Mr. Allen, you will amend your

pleadings, and put one of the accused on trial at a time."



Wilson broke in: "But, your honor! this is wholly unprecedented!

To imperil an accused person by arbitrarily altering and widening the

charge against him in order to compass his conviction when the charge as

originally brought promises to fail to convict, is a thing unheard of

before."



"Unheard of where?"



"In the courts of this or any other state."



The judge said with dignity: "I am not acquainted with the customs of

other courts, and am not concerned to know what they are.  I am

responsible for this court, and I cannot conscientiously allow my

judgment to be warped and my judicial liberty hampered by trying to

conform to the caprices of other courts, be they--"



"But, your honor, the oldest and highest courts in Europe--"



"This court is not run on the European plan, Mr. Wilson; it is not run on

any plan but its own.  It has a plan of its own; and that plan is,

to find justice for both State and accused, no matter what happens to be

practice and custom in Europe or anywhere else."  (Great applause.)

"Silence!  It has not been the custom of this court to imitate other

courts; it has not been the custom of this court to take shelter behind

the decisions of other courts, and we will not begin now.  We will do the

best we can by the light that God has given us, and while this 'court

continues to have His approval, it will remain indifferent to what other

organizations may think of it."  (Applause.) "Gentlemen, I must have

order!--quiet yourselves!  Mr. Allen, you will now proceed against the

prisoners one at a time.  Go on with the case."



Allen was not at his ease.  However, after whispering a moment with his

client and with one or two other people, he rose and said:



"Your honor, I find it to be reported and believed that the accused are

able to act independently in many ways, but that this independence does

not extend to their legs, authority over their legs being vested

exclusively in the one brother during a specific term of days, and then

passing to the other brother for a like term, and so on, by regular

alternation.  I could call witnesses who would prove that the accused had

revealed to them the existence of this extraordinary fact, and had also

made known which of them was in possession of the legs yesterday--and

this would, of course, indicate where the guilt of the assault belongs

--but as this would be mere hearsay evidence, these revelations not

having been made under oath"



"Never mind about that, Mr. Allen.  It may not all be hearsay.  We shall

see.  It may at least help to put us on the right track.  Call the

witnesses."



"Then I will call Mr. John Buckstone, who is now present, and I beg that

Mrs. Patsy Cooper may be sent for.  Take the stand, Mr. Buckstone."



Buckstone took the oath, and then testified that on the previous evening

the Count Angelo Capello had protested against going to the hall, and had

called all present to witness that he was going by compulsion and would

not go if he could help himself.  Also, that the Count Luigi had replied

sharply that he would go, just the same, and that he, Count Luigi, would

see to that himself.  Also, that upon Count Angelo's complaining about

being kept on his legs so long, Count Luigi retorted with apparent

surprise, "Your legs!--I like your impudence!"



"Now we are getting at the kernel of the thing," observed the judge, with

grave and earnest satisfaction.  "It looks as if the Count Luigi was in

possession of the battery at the time of the assault."



Nothing further was elicited from Mr. Buckstone on direct examination.

Mr. Wilson took the witness.



"Mr. Buckstone, about what time was it that that conversation took

place?"



"Toward nine yesterday evening, sir."



"Did you then proceed directly to the hall?"



"Yes, sir."



"How long did it take you to go there?"



"Well, we walked; and as it was from the extreme edge of the town, and

there was no hurry, I judge it took us about twenty minutes, maybe a

trifle more."



"About what hour was the kick delivered?"



"About thirteen minutes and a half to ten."



"Admirable!  You are a pattern witness, Mr. Buckstone.  How did you

happen to look at your watch at that particular moment?"



"I always do it when I see an assault.  It's likely I shall be called as

a witness, and it's a good point to have."



"It would be well if others were as thoughtful.  Was anything said,

between the conversation at my house and the assault, upon the detail

which we are now examining into?"



"No, sir."



"If power over the mutual legs was in the possession of one brother at

nine, and passed into the possession of the other one during the next

thirty or forty minutes, do you think you could have detected the

change?"



"By no means!"



"That is all, Mr.  Buckstone."



Mrs. Patsy Cooper was called.  The crowd made way for her, and she came

smiling and bowing through the narrow human lane, with Betsy Hale, as

escort and support, smiling and bowing in her wake, the audience breaking

into welcoming cheers as the old favorites filed along.  The judge did

not check this kindly demonstration of homage and affection, but let it

run its course unrebuked.



The old ladies stopped and shook hands with the twins with effusion, then

gave the judge a friendly nod, and bustled into the seats provided for

them.  They immediately began to deliver a volley of eager questions at

the friends around them: "What is this thing for?"  "What is that thing

for?"  "Who is that young man that's writing at the desk?  Why, I

declare, it's Jack Bunce!  I thought he was sick."  "Which is the jury?

Why, is that the jury?  Billy Price and Job Turner, and Jack Lounsbury,

and--well, I never!"  "Now who would ever 'a' thought--"



But they were gently called to order at this point, and asked not to talk

in court.  Their tongues fell silent, but the radiant interest in their

faces remained, and their gratitude for the blessing of a new sensation

and a novel experience still beamed undimmed from their eyes.  Aunt Patsy

stood up and took the oath, and Mr. Allen explained the point in issue,

and asked her to go on now, in her own way, and throw as much light upon

it as she could.  She toyed with her reticule a moment or two, as if

considering where to begin, then she said:



"Well, the way of it is this.  They are Luigi's legs a week at a time,

and then they are Angelo's, and he can do whatever he wants to with

them."



"You are making a mistake, Aunt Patsy Cooper," said the judge.  "You

shouldn't state that as a fact, because you don't know it to be a fact."



"What's the reason I don't?" said Aunt Patsy, bridling a little.



"What is the reason that you do know it?"



"The best in the world because they told me."



"That isn't a reason."



"Well, for the land's sake!  Betsy Hale, do you hear that?"



"Hear it?  I should think so," said Aunt Betsy, rising and facing the

court.  "Why, Judge, I was there and heard it myself.  Luigi says to

Angelo--no, it was Angelo said it to--"



"Come, come, Mrs.  Hale, pray sit down, and--"



"Certainly, it's all right, I'm going to sit down presently, but not

until I've--"



"But you must sit down!"



"Must!  Well, upon my word if things ain't getting to a pretty pass

when--"



The house broke into laughter, but was promptly brought to order, and

meantime Mr. Allen persuaded the old lady to take her seat.  Aunt Patsy

continued:



"Yes, they told me that, and I know it's true.  They're Luigi's legs this

week, but--"



"Ah, they told you that, did they?" said the Justice, with interest.



"Well, no, I don't know that they told me, but that's neither here nor

there.  I know, without that, that at dinner yesterday, Angelo was as

tired as a dog, and yet Luigi wouldn't lend him the legs to go up-stairs

and take a nap with."



"Did he ask for them?"



"Let me see--it seems to me, somehow, that--that--Aunt Betsy, do you

remember whether he--"



"Never mind about what Aunt Betsy remembers--she is not a witness; we

only want to know what you remember yourself," said the judge.



"Well, it does seem to, me that you are most cantankerously particular

about a little thing, Sim Robinson.  Why, when I can't remember a thing

myself, I always--"





"Ah, please go on!"



"Now how can she when you keep fussing at her all the time?" said Aunt

Betsy.  "Why, with a person pecking at me that way, I should get that

fuzzled and fuddled that--"



She was on her feet again, but Allen coaxed her into her seat once more,

while the court squelched the mirth of the house.  Then the judge said:



"Madam, do you know--do you absolutely know, independently of anything

these gentlemen have told you--that the power over their legs passes from

the one to the other regularly every week?"



"Regularly?  Bless your heart, regularly ain't any name for the exactness

of it!  All the big cities in Europe used to set the clocks by it."

(Laughter, suppressed by the court.)



"How do you know?  That is the question.  Please answer it plainly and

squarely."



"Don't you talk to me like that, Sim Robinson--I won't have it.  How do

I know, indeed!  How do you know what you know?  Because somebody told

you.  You didn't invent it out of your own head, did you?  Why, these

twins are the truthfulest people in the world; and I don't think it

becomes you to sit up there and throw slurs at them when they haven't

been doing anything to you.  And they are orphans besides--both of them.

All--"



But Aunt Betsy was up again now, and both old ladies were talking at once

and with all their might; but as the house was weltering in a storm of

laughter, and the judge was hammering his desk with an iron paper-weight,

one could only see them talk, not hear them.  At last, when quiet was

restored, the court said:



"Let the ladies retire."



"But, your honor, I have the right, in the interest of my clients,--to

cross-exam--"



"You'll not need to exercise it, Mr. Wilson--the evidence is thrown out."



"Thrown out!" said Aunt Patsy, ruffled; "and what's it thrown out for,

I'd like to know."



"And so would I, Patsy Cooper.  It seems to me that if we can save these

poor persecuted strangers, it is our bounden duty to stand up here and

talk for them till--"



"There, there, there, do sit down!"



It cost some trouble and a good deal of coaxing, but they were got into

their seats at last.  The trial was soon ended now.  The twins themselves

became witnesses in their own defense.  They established the fact, upon

oath, that the leg-power passed from one to the other every Saturday

night at twelve o'clock sharp.  But or cross-examination their counsel

would not allow them to tell whose week of power the current week was.

The judge insisted upon their answering, and proposed to compel them, but

even the prosecution took fright and came to the rescue then, and helped

stay the sturdy jurist's revolutionary hand.  So the case had to go to

the jury with that important point hanging in the air.  They were out an

hour and brought in this verdict:



"We the jury do find:  1, that an assault was committed, as charged;

2, that it was committed by one of the persons accused, he having been

seen to do it by several credible witnesses; 3, but that his identity is

so merged in his brother's that we have not been able to tell which was

him.  We cannot convict both, for only one is guilty.  We cannot acquit

both, for only one is innocent.  Our verdict is that justice has been

defeated by the dispensation of God, and ask to be discharged from

further duty."



This was read aloud in court and brought out a burst of hearty applause.

The old ladies made a spring at the twins, to shake and congratulate, but

were gently disengaged by Mr. Wilson and softly crowded back into their

places.



The judge rose in his little tribune, laid aside his silver-bowed

spectacles, roached his gray hair up with his fingers, and said, with

dignity and solemnity, and even with a certain pathos:



"In all my experience on the bench, I have not seen justice bow her

head in shame in this court until this day.  You little realize what

far-reaching harm has just been wrought here under the fickle forms of law.

Imitation is the bane of courts--I thank God that this one is free from

the contamination of that vice--and in no long time you will see the

fatal work of this hour seized upon by profligate so-called guardians of

justice in all the wide circumstance of this planet and perpetuated in

their pernicious decisions.  I wash my hands of this iniquity.  I would

have compelled these culprits to expose their guilt, but support failed

me where I had most right to expect aid and encouragement.  And I was

confronted by a law made in the interest of crime, which protects the

criminal from testifying against himself.  Yet I had precedents of my own

whereby I had set aside that law on two different occasions and thus

succeeded in convicting criminals to whose crimes there were no witnesses

but themselves.  What have you accomplished this day?  Do you realize it?

You have set adrift, unadmonished, in this community, two men endowed

with an awful and mysterious gift, a hidden and grisly power for evil

--a power by which each in his turn may commit crime after crime of the

most heinous character, and no man be able to tell which is the guilty or

which the innocent party in any case of them all.  Look to your homes

look to your property look to your lives for you have need!



"Prisoners at the bar, stand up.  Through suppression of evidence, a jury

of your--our--countrymen have been obliged to deliver a verdict

concerning your case which stinks to heaven with the rankness of its

injustice.  By its terms you, the guilty one, go free with the innocent.

Depart in peace, and come no more!  The costs devolve upon the outraged

plaintiff--another iniquity.  The court stands dissolved."



Almost everybody crowded forward to overwhelm the twins and their counsel

with congratulations; but presently the two old aunties dug the

duplicates out and bore them away in triumph through the hurrahing crowd,

while lots of new friends carried Pudd'nhead Wilson off tavernward to

feast him and "wet down" his great and victorious entry into the legal

arena.  To Wilson, so long familiar with neglect and depreciation, this

strange new incense of popularity and admiration was as a fragrance blown

from the fields of paradise.  A happy man was Wilson.









CHAPTER VI



THE AMAZING DUEL



     A deputation came in the evening and conferred upon Wilson the

     welcome honor of a nomination for mayor; for the village has just

     been converted into a city by charter.  Tom skulks out of

     challenging the twins.  Judge Driscoll thereupon challenges Angelo

     (accused by Tom of doing the kicking); he declines, but Luigi

     accepts in his place against Angelo's timid protest.



It was late Saturday night nearing eleven.



The judge and his second found the rest of the war party at the further

end of the vacant ground, near the haunted house.  Pudd'nhead Wilson

advanced to meet them, and said anxiously:



"I must say a word in behalf of my principal's proxy, Count Luigi, to

whom you have kindly granted the privilege of fighting my principal's

battle for him.  It is growing late, and Count Luigi is in great trouble

lest midnight shall strike before the finish."



"It is another testimony," said Howard, approvingly.  "That young man is

fine all through.  He wishes to save his brother the sorrow of fighting

on the Sabbath, and he is right; it is the right and manly feeling and

does him credit.  We will make all possible haste."



Wilson said: "There is also another reason--a consideration, in fact,

which deeply concerns Count Luigi himself.  These twins have command of

their mutual legs turn about.  Count Luigi is in command now; but at

midnight, possession will pass to my principal, Count Angelo, and--well,

you can foresee what will happen.  He will march straight off the field,

and carry Luigi with him."



"Why! sure enough!" cried the judge, "we have heard something about that

extraordinary law of their being, already--nothing very definite, it is

true, as regards dates and durations of power, but I see it is definite

enough as regards to-night.  Of course we must give Luigi every chance.

Omit all the ceremonial possible, gentlemen, and place us in position."



The seconds at once tossed up a coin; Howard won the choice.  He placed

the judge sixty feet from the haunted house and facing it; Wilson placed

the twins within fifteen feet of the house and facing the judge

--necessarily.  The pistol-case was opened and the long slim tubes taken

out; when the moonlight glinted from them a shiver went through Angelo.

The doctor was a fool, but a thoroughly well-meaning one, with a kind

heart and a sincere disposition to oblige, but along with it an absence

of tact which often hurt its effectiveness.  He brought his box of lint

and bandages, and asked Angelo to feel and see how soft and comfortable

they were.  Angelo's head fell over against Luigi's in a faint, and

precious time was lost in bringing him to; which provoked Luigi into

expressing his mind to the doctor with a good deal of vigor and

frankness.  After Angelo came to he was still so weak that Luigi was

obliged to drink a stiff horn of brandy to brace him up.



The seconds now stepped at once to their posts, halfway between the

combatants, one of them on each side of the line of fire.  Wilson was to

count, very deliberately, "One-two-three-fire!--stop!" and the duelists

could bang away at any time they chose during that recitation, but not

after the last word.  Angelo grew very nervous when he saw Wilson's hand

rising slowly into the air as a sign to make ready, and he leaned his

head against Luigi's and said:



"Oh, please take me away from here, I can't stay, I know I can't!"



"What in the world are you doing?  Straighten up!  What's the matter with

you?--you're in no danger--nobody's going to shoot at you.  Straighten

up, I tell you!"



Angelo obeyed, just in time to hear:



"One--!"



"Bang!"  Just one report, and a little tuft of white hair floated slowly

to the judge's feet in the moonlight.  The judge did not swerve; he still

stood erect and motionless, like a statue, with his pistol-arm hanging

straight down at his side.  He was reserving his fire.



"Two--!"



"Three--"!



"Fire--!"



Up came the pistol-arm instantly-Angelo dodged with the report.  He said

"Ouch!" and fainted again.



The doctor examined and bandaged the wound.



It was of no consequence, he said--bullet through fleshy part of arm--no

bones broken the gentleman was still able to fight let the duel proceed.



Next time Angelo jumped just as Luigi fired, which disordered his aim and

caused him to cut a chip off of Howard's ear.  The judge took his time

again, and when he fired Angelo jumped and got a knuckle skinned.  The

doctor inspected and dressed the wounds.  Angelo now spoke out and said

he was content with the satisfaction he had got, and if the judge--but

Luigi shut him roughly up, and asked him not to make an ass of himself;

adding:



"And I want you to stop dodging.  You take a great deal too prominent a

part in this thing for a person who has got nothing to do with it.  You

should remember that you are here only by courtesy, and are without

official recognition; officially you are not here at all; officially you

do not even exist.  To all intents and purposes you are absent from this

place, and you ought for your own modesty's sake to reflect that it

cannot become a person who is not present here to be taking this sort of

public and indecent prominence in a matter in which he is not in the

slightest degree concerned.  Now, don't dodge again; the bullets are not

for you, they are for me; if I want them dodged I will attend to it

myself.  I never saw a person act so."



Angelo saw the reasonableness of what his brother had said, and he did

try to reform, but it was of no use; both pistols went off at the same

instant, and he jumped once more; he got a sharp scrape along his cheek

from the judge's bullet, and so deflected Luigi's aim that his ball went

wide and chipped flake of skin from Pudd'nhead Wilson's chin.  The doctor

attended to the wounded.



By the terms, the duel was over.  But Luigi was entirely out of patience,

and begged for one exchange of shots, insisting that he had had no fair

chance, on account of his brother's indelicate behavior.  Howard was

opposed to granting so unusual a privilege, but the judge took Luigi's

part, and added that indeed he himself might fairly be considered

entitled to another trial, because although the proxy on the other side

was in no way to blame for his (the judge's) humiliatingly resultless

work, the gentleman with whom he was fighting this duel was to blame for

it, since if he had played no advantages and had held his head still, his

proxy would have been disposed of early.  He added:



"Count Luigi's request for another exchange is another proof that he is a

brave and chivalrous gentleman, and I beg that the courtesy he asks may

be accorded him."



"I thank you most sincerely for this generosity, Judge Driscoll," said

Luigi, with a polite bow, and moving to his place.  Then he added to

Angelo, "Now hold your grip, hold your grip, I tell you, and I'll land

him sure!"



The men stood erect, their pistol-arms at their sides, the two seconds

stood at their official posts, the doctor stood five paces in Wilson's

rear with his instruments and bandages in his hands.  The deep stillness,

the peaceful moonlight, the motionless figures, made an impressive

picture and the impending fatal possibilities augmented this

impressiveness solemnity.  Wilson's hand began to rise--slowly--still

higher--still higher--in another moment:



"Boom!" the first stroke of midnight swung up  out of the distance;

Angelo was off like a deer!



"Oh, you unspeakable traitor!" wailed his brother, as they went soaring

over the fence.



The others stood astonished and gazing; and so stood, watching that

strange spectacle until distance dissolved it and swept it from their

view.  Then they rubbed their eyes like people waking out of a dream,



"Well, I've never seen anything like that before!" said the judge.

"Wilson, I am going to confess now, that I wasn't quite able to believe

in that leg business, and had a suspicion that it was a put-up

convenience between those twins; and when Count Angelo fainted I thought

I saw the whole scheme--thought it was pretext No. 2, and would be

followed by others till twelve o'clock should arrive, and Luigi would get

off with all the credit of seeming to want to fight and yet not have to

fight, after all.  But I was mistaken.  His pluck proved it.  He's a

brave fellow and did want to fight."



"There isn't any doubt about that," said Howard, and added, in a grieved

tone, "but what an unworthy sort of Christian that Angelo is--I hope and

believe there are not many like him.  It is not right to engage in a duel

on the Sabbath--I could not approve of that myself; but to finish one

that has been begun--that is a duty, let the day be what it may."



They strolled along, still wondering, still talking.



"It is a curious circumstance," remarked the surgeon, halting Wilson a

moment to paste so more court-plaster on his chin, which had gone to

leaking blood again, "that in this duel neither of the parties who

handled the pistols lost blood while nearly all the persons present in

the mere capacity of guests got hit.  I have not heard of such a thing

before.  Don't you think it unusual?"



"Yes," said the Judge, "it has struck me as peculiar.  Peculiar and

unfortunate.  I was annoyed at it, all the time.  In the case of Angelo

it made no great difference, because he was in a measure concerned,

though not officially; but it troubled me to see the seconds compromised,

and yet I knew no way to mend the matter.



"There was no way to mend it," said Howard, whose ear was being

readjusted now by the doctor; "the code fixes our place, and it would not

have been lawful to change it.  If we could have stood at your side, or

behind you, or in front of you, it--but it would not have been legitimate

and the other parties would have had a just right to complain of our

trying to protect ourselves from danger; infractions of the code are

certainly not permissible in any case whatever."



Wilson offered no remarks.  It seemed to him that there was very little

place here for so much solemnity, but he judged that if a duel where

nobody was in danger or got crippled but the seconds and the outsiders

had nothing ridiculous about it for these gentlemen, his pointing out

that feature would probably not help them to see it.



He invited them in to take a nightcap, and Howard and the judge accepted,

but the doctor said he would have to go and see how Angelo's principal

wound was getting on.



     [It was now Sunday, and in the afternoon Angelo was to be received

     into the Baptist communion by immersion--a doubtful prospect, the

     doctor feared.]









CHAPTER VII



LUIGI DEFIES GALEN



When the doctor arrived at Aunt Patsy Cooper's house, he found the lights

going and everybody up and dressed and in a great state of solicitude and

excitement.  The twins were stretched on a sofa in the sitting-room, Aunt

Patsy was fussing at Angelo's arm, Nancy was flying around under her

commands, the two young boys were trying to keep out of the way and

always getting in it, in order to see and wonder, Rowena stood apart,

helpless with apprehension and emotion, and Luigi was growling in

unappeasable fury over Angelo's shameful flight.



As has been reported before, the doctor was a fool--a kind-hearted and

well-meaning one, but with no tact; and as he was by long odds the most

learned physician in the town, and was quite well aware of it, and could

talk his learning with ease and precision, and liked to show off when he

had an audience, he was sometimes tempted into revealing more of a case

than was good for the patient.



He examined Angelo's wound, and was really minded to say nothing for

once; but Aunt Patsy was so anxious and so pressing that he allowed his

caution to be overcome, and proceeded to empty himself as follows, with

scientific relish:



"Without going too much into detail, madam--for you would probably not

understand it, anyway--I concede that great care is going to be necessary

here; otherwise exudation of the esophagus is nearly sure to ensue, and

this will be followed by ossification and extradition of the maxillaris

superioris, which must decompose the granular surfaces of the great

infusorial ganglionic system, thus obstructing the action of the

posterior varioloid arteries, and precipitating compound strangulated

sorosis of the valvular tissues, and ending unavoidably in the dispersion

and combustion of the marsupial fluxes and the consequent embrocation of

the bicuspid populo redax referendum rotulorum."



A miserable silence followed.  Aunt Patsy's heart sank, the pallor of

despair invaded her face, she was not able to speak; poor Rowena wrung

her hands in privacy and silence, and said to herself in the bitterness

of her young grief, "There is no hope--it is plain there is no hope"; the

good-hearted negro wench, Nancy, paled to chocolate, then to orange, then

to amber, and thought to herself with yearning sympathy and sorrow, "Po'

thing, he ain' gwyne to las' throo de half o' dat"; small Henry choked

up, and turned his head away to hide his rising tears, and his brother

Joe said to himself, with a sense of loss, "The baptizing's busted,

that's sure."  Luigi was the only person who had any heart to speak.  He

said, a little bit sharply, to the doctor:



"Well, well, there's nothing to be gained by wasting precious time; give

him a barrel of pills--I'll take them for him."



"You?" asked the doctor.



"Yes.  Did you suppose he was going to take them himself?"



"Why, of course."



"Well, it's a mistake.  He never took a dose of medicine in his life.  He

can't."



"Well, upon my word, it's the most extraordinary thing I ever heard of!"



"Oh," said Aunt Patsy, as pleased as a mother whose child is being

admired and wondered at; "you'll find that there's more about them that's

wonderful than their just being made in the image of God like the rest of

His creatures, now you can depend on that, I tell you," and she wagged

her complacent head like one who could reveal marvelous things if she

chose.



The boy Joe began:



"Why, ma, they ain't made in the im--"



"You shut up, and wait till you're asked, Joe.  I'll let you know when I

want help.  Are you looking for something, doctor?"



The doctor asked for a few sheets of paper and a pen, and said he would

write a prescription; which he did.  It was one of Galen's; in fact, it

was Galen's favorite, and had been slaying people for sixteen thousand

years.  Galen used it for everything, applied it to everything, said it

would remove everything, from warts all the way through to lungs and it

generally did.  Galen was still the only medical authority recognized in

Missouri; his practice was the only practice known to the Missouri

doctors, and his prescriptions were the only ammunition they carried when

they went out for game.



By and by Dr. Claypool laid down his pen and read the result of his

labors aloud, carefully and deliberately, for this battery must be

constructed on the premises by the family, and mistakes could occur;

for he wrote a doctor's hand the hand which from the beginning of time

has been so disastrous to the apothecary and so profitable to the

undertaker:



"Take of afarabocca, henbane, corpobalsamum, each two drams and a half:

of cloves, opium, myrrh, cyperus, each two drams; of opobalsamum, Indian

leaf, cinnamon, zedoary, ginger, coftus, coral, cassia, euphorbium, gum

tragacanth, frankincense, styrax calamita, Celtic, nard, spignel,

hartwort, mustard, saxifrage, dill, anise, each one dram; of xylaloes,

rheum ponticum, alipta, moschata, castor, spikenard, galangals, opoponax,

anacardium, mastich, brimstone, peony, eringo, pulp of dates, red and

white hermodactyls, roses, thyme, acorns, pennyroyal, gentian, the bark

of the root of mandrake, germander, valerian, bishop's-weed, bayberries,

long and white pepper, xylobalsamum, carnabadium, macedonian, parsley

seeds, lovage, the seeds of rue, and sinon, of each a dram and a half; of

pure gold, pure silver, pearls not perforated, the blatta byzantina, the

bone of the stag's heart, of each the quantity of fourteen grains of

wheat; of sapphire, emerald and jasper stones, each one dram; of

hazel-nuts, two drams; of pellitory of Spain, shavings of ivory, calamus

odoratus, each the quantity of twenty-nine grains of wheat; of honey or

sugar a sufficient quantity.  Boil down and skim off."



"There," he said, "that will fix the patient; give his brother a

dipperful every three-quarters of an hour--"



"--while he survives," muttered Luigi--



"--and see that the room is kept wholesomely hot, and the doors and

windows closed tight.  Keep Count Angelo nicely covered up with six or

seven blankets, and when he is thirsty--which will be frequently--moisten

a 'rag in the vapor of the tea kettle and let his brother suck it.  When

he is hungry--which will also be frequently he must not be humored

oftener than every seven or eight hours; then toast part of a cracker

until it begins to brown, and give it to his brother."



"That is all very well, as far as Angelo is concerned," said Luigi, "but

what am I to eat?"



"I do not see that there is anything the matter with you," the doctor

answered, "you may, of course, eat what you please."



"And also drink what I please, I suppose?"



"Oh, certainly--at present.  When the violent and continuous perspiring

has reduced your strength, I shall have to reduce your diet, of course,

and also bleed you, but there is no occasion for that yet awhile."  He

turned to Aunt Patsy and said: "He must be put to bed, and sat up with,

and tended with the greatest care, and not allowed to stir for several

days and nights."



"For one, I'm sacredly thankful for that," said Luigi, "it postpones the

funeral--I'm not to be drowned to-day, anyhow."



Angelo said quietly to the doctor:



"I will cheerfully submit to all your requirements, sir, up to two

o'clock this afternoon, and will resume them after three, but cannot be

confined to the house during that intermediate hour."



"Why, may I ask?"



"Because I have entered the Baptist communion, and by appointment am to

be baptised in the river at that hour."



"Oh, insanity!--it cannot be allowed!"



Angelo answered with placid firmness:



"Nothing shall prevent it, if I am alive."



"Why, consider, my dear sir, in your condition it might prove fatal."



A tender and ecstatic smile beamed from Angelo's eyes, and he broke forth

in a tone of joyous fervency:



"Ah, how blessed it would be to die for such a cause--it would be

martyrdom!"



"But your brother--consider your brother; you would be risking his life,

too."



"He risked mine an hour ago," responded Angelo, gloomily; "did he

consider me?"  A thought swept through his mind that made him shudder.

"If I had not run, I might have been killed in a duel on the Sabbath day,

and my soul would have been lost--lost."



"Oh, don't fret, it wasn't in any danger," said Luigi, irritably; "they

wouldn't waste it for a little thing like that; there's a glass case all

ready for it in the heavenly museum, and a pin to stick it up with."



Aunt Patsy was shocked, and said:



"Looy, Looy!--don't talk so, dear!"

