they were quite apt to do at night.  It was always a time of confidences.



"Thee has another letter from young Sterling," said Eli Bolton.



"Yes.  Philip has gone to the far west."



"How far?"



"He doesn't say, but it's on the frontier, and on the map everything

beyond it is marked 'Indians' and 'desert,' and looks as desolate as a

Wednesday Meeting."



"Humph.  It was time for him to do something.  Is he going to start a

daily newspaper among the Kick-a-poos?"



"Father, thee's unjust to Philip.  He's going into business."



"What sort of business can a young man go into without capital?"



"He doesn't say exactly what it is," said Ruth a little dubiously, "but

it's something about land and railroads, and thee knows, father, that

fortunes are made nobody knows exactly how, in a new country."



"I should think so, you innocent puss, and in an old one too.  But Philip

is honest, and he has talent enough, if he will stop scribbling, to make

his way.  But thee may as well take care of theeself, Ruth, and not go

dawdling along with a young man in his adventures, until thy own mind is

a little more settled what thee wants."



This excellent advice did not seem to impress Ruth greatly, for she was

looking away with that abstraction of vision which often came into her

grey eyes, and at length she exclaimed, with a sort of impatience,



"I wish I could go west, or south, or somewhere.  What a box women are

put into, measured for it, and put in young; if we go anywhere it's in a

box, veiled and pinioned and shut in by disabilities.  Father, I should

like to break things and get loose!"



What a sweet-voiced little innocent, it was to be sure.



"Thee will no doubt break things enough when thy time comes, child; women

always have; but what does thee want now that thee hasn't?"



"I want to be something, to make myself something, to do something.  Why

should I rust, and be stupid, and sit in inaction because I am a girl?

What would happen to me if thee should lose thy property and die?  What

one useful thing could I do for a living, for the support of mother and

the children?  And if I had a fortune, would thee want me to lead a

useless life?"



"Has thy mother led a useless life?"



"Somewhat that depends upon whether her children amount to anything,"

retorted the sharp little disputant.  "What's the good, father, of a

series of human beings who don't advance any?"



Friend Eli, who had long ago laid aside the Quaker dress, and was out of

Meeting, and who in fact after a youth of doubt could not yet define his

belief, nevertheless looked with some wonder at this fierce young eagle

of his, hatched in a Friend's dove-cote.  But he only said,



"Has thee consulted thy mother about a career, I suppose it is a career

thee wants?"



Ruth did not reply directly; she complained that her mother didn't

understand her.  But that wise and placid woman understood the sweet

rebel a great deal better than Ruth understood herself.  She also had a

history, possibly, and had sometime beaten her young wings against the

cage of custom, and indulged in dreams of a new social order, and had

passed through that fiery period when it seems possible for one mind,

which has not yet tried its limits, to break up and re-arrange the world.



Ruth replied to Philip's letter in due time and in the most cordial and

unsentimental manner.  Philip liked the letter, as he did everything she

did; but he had a dim notion that there was more about herself in the

letter than about him.  He took it with him from the Southern Hotel, when

he went to walk, and read it over and again in an unfrequented street as

he stumbled along. The rather common-place and unformed hand-writing

seemed to him peculiar and characteristic, different from that of any

other woman.



Ruth was glad to hear that Philip had made a push into the world, and she

was sure that his talent and courage would make a way for him.  She

should pray for his success at any rate, and especially that the Indians,

in St. Louis, would not take his scalp.



Philip looked rather dubious at this sentence, and wished that he had

written nothing about Indians.









CHAPTER XV.



Eli Bolton and his wife talked over Ruth's case, as they had often done

before, with no little anxiety.  Alone of all their children she was

impatient of the restraints and monotony of the Friends' Society, and

wholly indisposed to accept the "inner light" as a guide into a life of

acceptance and inaction.  When Margaret told her husband of Ruth's newest

project, he did not exhibit so much surprise as she hoped for.  In fact

he said that he did not see why a woman should not enter the medical

profession if she felt a call to it.



"But," said Margaret, "consider her total inexperience of the world, and

her frail health.  Can such a slight little body endure the ordeal of the

preparation for, or the strain of, the practice of the profession?"



"Did thee ever think, Margaret, whether, she can endure being thwarted in

an, object on which she has so set her heart, as she has on this?  Thee

has trained her thyself at home, in her enfeebled childhood, and thee

knows how strong her will is, and what she has been able to accomplish in

self-culture by the simple force of her determination.  She never will be

satisfied until she has tried her own strength."



"I wish," said Margaret, with an inconsequence that is not exclusively

feminine, "that she were in the way to fall in love and marry by and by.

I think that would cure her of some of her notions.  I am not sure but if

she went away, to some distant school, into an entirely new life, her

thoughts would be diverted."



Eli Bolton almost laughed as he regarded his wife, with eyes that never

looked at her except fondly, and replied,



"Perhaps thee remembers that thee had notions also, before we were

married, and before thee became a member of Meeting.  I think Ruth comes

honestly by certain tendencies which thee has hidden under the Friend's

dress."



Margaret could not say no to this, and while she paused, it was evident

that memory was busy with suggestions to shake her present opinions.



"Why not let Ruth try the study for a time," suggested Eli; "there is a

fair beginning of a Woman's Medical College in the city.  Quite likely

she will soon find that she needs first a more general culture, and fall,

in with thy wish that she should see more of the world at some large

school."



There really seemed to be nothing else to be done, and Margaret consented

at length without approving.  And it was agreed that Ruth, in order to

spare her fatigue, should take lodgings with friends near the college and

make a trial in the pursuit of that science to which we all owe our

lives, and sometimes as by a miracle of escape.



That day Mr. Bolton brought home a stranger to dinner, Mr. Bigler of the

great firm of Pennybacker, Bigler & Small, railroad contractors.  He was

always bringing home somebody, who had a scheme; to build a road, or open

a mine, or plant a swamp with cane to grow paper-stock, or found a

hospital, or invest in a patent shad-bone separator, or start a college

somewhere on the frontier, contiguous to a land speculation.



The Bolton house was a sort of hotel for this kind of people.  They were

always coming.  Ruth had known them from childhood, and she used to say

that her father attracted them as naturally as a sugar hogshead does

flies.  Ruth had an idea that a large portion of the world lived by

getting the rest of the world into schemes.  Mr. Bolton never could say

"no" to any of them, not even, said Ruth again, to the society for

stamping oyster shells with scripture texts before they were sold at

retail.



Mr. Bigler's plan this time, about which he talked loudly, with his mouth

full, all dinner time, was the building of the Tunkhannock, Rattlesnake

and Young-womans-town railroad, which would not only be a great highway to

the west, but would open to market inexhaustible coal-fields and untold

millions of lumber.  The plan of operations was very simple.



"We'll buy the lands," explained he, "on long time, backed by the notes

of good men; and then mortgage them for money enough to get the road well

on.  Then get the towns on the line to issue their bonds for stock, and

sell their bonds for enough to complete the road, and partly stock it,

especially if we mortgage each section as we complete it.  We can then

sell the rest of the stock on the prospect of the business of the road

through an improved country, and also sell the lands at a big advance,

on the strength of the road.  All we want," continued Mr. Bigler in his

frank manner, "is a few thousand dollars to start the surveys, and

arrange things in the legislature.  There is some parties will have to be

seen, who might make us trouble."



"It will take a good deal of money to start the enterprise," remarked Mr.

Bolton, who knew very well what "seeing" a Pennsylvania Legislature

meant, but was too polite to tell Mr. Bigler what he thought of him,

while he was his guest; "what security would one have for it?"



Mr. Bigler smiled a hard kind of smile, and said, "You'd be inside, Mr.

Bolton, and you'd have the first chance in the deal."



This was rather unintelligible to Ruth, who was nevertheless somewhat

amused by the study of a type of character she had seen before.

At length she interrupted the conversation by asking,



"You'd sell the stock, I suppose, Mr. Bigler, to anybody who was

attracted by the prospectus?"



"O, certainly, serve all alike," said Mr. Bigler, now noticing Ruth for

the first time, and a little puzzled by the serene, intelligent face that

was turned towards him.



"Well, what would become of the poor people who had been led to put their

little money into the speculation, when you got out of it and left it

half way?"



It would be no more true to say of Mr. Bigler that he was or could be

embarrassed, than to say that a brass counterfeit dollar-piece would

change color when refused; the question annoyed him a little, in Mr.

Bolton's presence.



"Why, yes, Miss, of course, in a great enterprise for the benefit of the

community there will little things occur, which, which--and, of course,

the poor ought to be looked to; I tell my wife, that the poor must be

looked to; if you can tell who are poor--there's so many impostors.  And

then, there's so many poor in the legislature to be looked after," said

the contractor with a sort of a chuckle, "isn't that so, Mr. Bolton?"



Eli Bolton replied that he never had much to do with the legislature.



"Yes," continued this public benefactor, "an uncommon poor lot this year,

uncommon.  Consequently an expensive lot.  The fact is, Mr. Bolton, that

the price is raised so high on United States Senator now, that it affects

the whole market; you can't get any public improvement through on

reasonable terms.  Simony is what I call it, Simony," repeated Mr.

Bigler, as if he had said a good thing.



Mr. Bigler went on and gave some very interesting details of the intimate

connection between railroads and politics, and thoroughly entertained

himself all dinner time, and as much disgusted Ruth, who asked no more

questions, and her father who replied in monosyllables:



"I wish," said Ruth to her father, after the guest had gone, "that you

wouldn't bring home any more such horrid men.  Do all men who wear big

diamond breast-pins, flourish their knives at table, and use bad grammar,

and cheat?"



"O, child, thee mustn't be too observing.  Mr. Bigler is one of the most

important men in the state; nobody has more influence at Harrisburg.

I don't like him any more than thee does, but I'd better lend him a

little money than to have his ill will."



"Father, I think thee'd better have his ill-will than his company.  Is it

true that he gave money to help build the pretty little church of

St. James the Less, and that he is, one of the vestrymen?"



"Yes.  He is not such a bad fellow.  One of the men in Third street asked

him the other day, whether his was a high church or a low church?  Bigler

said he didn't know; he'd been in it once, and he could touch the ceiling

in the side aisle with his hand."



"I think he's just horrid," was Ruth's final summary of him, after the

manner of the swift judgment of women, with no consideration of the

extenuating circumstances.  Mr. Bigler had no idea that he had not made a

good impression on the whole family; he certainly intended to be

agreeable.  Margaret agreed with her daughter, and though she never said

anything to such people, she was grateful to Ruth for sticking at least

one pin into him.



Such was the serenity of the Bolton household that a stranger in it would

never have suspected there was any opposition to Ruth's going to the

Medical School.  And she went quietly to take her residence in town, and

began her attendance of the lectures, as if it were the most natural

thing in the world.  She did not heed, if she heard, the busy and

wondering gossip of relations and acquaintances, gossip that has no less

currency among the Friends than elsewhere because it is whispered slyly

and creeps about in an undertone.



Ruth was absorbed, and for the first time in her life thoroughly happy;

happy in the freedom of her life, and in the keen enjoyment of the

investigation that broadened its field day by day.  She was in high

spirits when she came home to spend First Days; the house was full of her

gaiety and her merry laugh, and the children wished that Ruth would never

go away again.  But her mother noticed, with a little anxiety, the

sometimes flushed face, and the sign of an eager spirit in the kindling

eyes, and, as well, the serious air of determination and endurance in her

face at unguarded moments.



The college was a small one and it sustained itself not without

difficulty in this city, which is so conservative, and is yet the origin

of so many radical movements.  There were not more than a dozen

attendants on the lectures all together, so that the enterprise had the

air of an experiment, and the fascination of pioneering for those engaged

in it.  There was one woman physician driving about town in her carriage,

attacking the most violent diseases in all quarters with persistent

courage, like a modern Bellona in her war chariot, who was popularly

supposed to gather in fees to the amount ten to twenty thousand dollars a

year.  Perhaps some of these students looked forward to the near day when

they would support such a practice and a husband besides, but it is

unknown that any of them ever went further than practice in hospitals and

in their own nurseries, and it is feared that some of them were quite as

ready as their sisters, in emergencies, to "call a man."



If Ruth had any exaggerated expectations of a professional life, she kept

them to herself, and was known to her fellows of the class simply as a

cheerful, sincere student, eager in her investigations, and never

impatient at anything, except an insinuation that women had not as much

mental capacity for science as men.



"They really say," said one young Quaker sprig to another youth of his

age, "that Ruth Bolton is really going to be a saw-bones, attends

lectures, cuts up bodies, and all that.  She's cool enough for a surgeon,

anyway."  He spoke feelingly, for he had very likely been weighed in

Ruth's calm eyes sometime, and thoroughly scared by the little laugh that

accompanied a puzzling reply to one of his conversational nothings.  Such

young gentlemen, at this time, did not come very distinctly into Ruth's

horizon, except as amusing circumstances.



About the details of her student life, Ruth said very little to her

friends, but they had reason to know, afterwards, that it required all

her nerve and the almost complete exhaustion of her physical strength,

to carry her through.  She began her anatomical practice upon detached

portions of the human frame, which were brought into the demonstrating

room--dissecting the eye, the ear, and a small tangle of muscles and

nerves--an occupation which had not much more savor of death in it than

the analysis of a portion of a plant out of which the life went when it

was plucked up by the roots.  Custom inures the most sensitive persons to

that which is at first most repellant; and in the late war we saw the

most delicate women, who could not at home endure the sight of blood,

become so used to scenes of carnage, that they walked the hospitals and

the margins of battle-fields, amid the poor remnants of torn humanity,

with as perfect self-possession as if they were strolling in a flower

garden.



It happened that Ruth was one evening deep in a line of investigation

which she could not finish or understand without demonstration, and so

eager was she in it, that it seemed as if she could not wait till the

next day.  She, therefore, persuaded a fellow student, who was reading

that evening with her, to go down to the dissecting room of the college,

and ascertain what they wanted to know by an hour's work there.  Perhaps,

also, Ruth wanted to test her own nerve, and to see whether the power of

association was stronger in her mind than her own will.



The janitor of the shabby and comfortless old building admitted the

girls, not without suspicion, and gave them lighted candles, which they

would need, without other remark than "there's a new one, Miss," as the

girls went up the broad stairs.



They climbed to the third story, and paused before a door, which they

unlocked, and which admitted them into a long apartment, with a row of

windows on one side and one at the end.  The room was without light, save

from the stars and the candles the girls carried, which revealed to them

dimly two long and several small tables, a few benches and chairs, a

couple of skeletons hanging on the wall, a sink, and cloth-covered heaps

of something upon the tables here and there.



The windows were open, and the cool night wind came in strong enough to

flutter a white covering now and then, and to shake the loose casements.

But all the sweet odors of the night could not take from the room a faint

suggestion of mortality.



The young ladies paused a moment.  The room itself was familiar enough,

but night makes almost any chamber eerie, and especially such a room of

detention as this where the mortal parts of the unburied might--almost be

supposed to be, visited, on the sighing night winds, by the wandering

spirits of their late tenants.



Opposite and at some distance across the roofs of lower buildings, the

girls saw a tall edifice, the long upper story of which seemed to be a

dancing hall.  The windows of that were also open, and through them they

heard the scream of the jiggered and tortured violin, and the pump, pump

of the oboe, and saw the moving shapes of men and women in quick

transition, and heard the prompter's drawl.



"I wonder," said Ruth, "what the girls dancing there would think if they

saw us, or knew that there was such a room as this so near them."



She did not speak very loud, and, perhaps unconsciously, the girls drew

near to each other as they approached the long table in the centre of the

room.  A straight object lay upon it, covered with a sheet.  This was

doubtless "the new one" of which the janitor spoke.  Ruth advanced, and

with a not very steady hand lifted the white covering from the upper part

of the figure and turned it down.  Both the girls started.  It was a

negro.  The black face seemed to defy the pallor of death, and asserted

an ugly life-likeness that was frightful.



Ruth was as pale as the white sheet, and her comrade whispered, "Come

away, Ruth, it is awful."



Perhaps it was the wavering light of the candles, perhaps it was only the

agony from a death of pain, but the repulsive black face seemed to wear a

scowl that said, "Haven't you yet done with the outcast, persecuted black

man, but you must now haul him from his grave, and send even your women

to dismember his body?"



Who is this dead man, one of thousands who died yesterday, and will be

dust anon, to protest that science shall not turn his worthless carcass

to some account?



Ruth could have had no such thought, for with a pity in her sweet face,

that for the moment overcame fear and disgust, she reverently replaced

the covering, and went away to her own table, as her companion did to

hers.  And there for an hour they worked at their several problems,

without speaking, but not without an awe of the presence there, "the new

one," and not without an awful sense of life itself, as they heard the

pulsations of the music and the light laughter from the dancing-hall.



When, at length, they went away, and locked the dreadful room behind

them, and came out into the street, where people were passing, they, for

the first time, realized, in the relief they felt, what a nervous strain

they had been under.









CHAPTER XVI.



While Ruth was thus absorbed in her new occupation, and the spring was

wearing away, Philip and his friends were still detained at the Southern

Hotel.  The great contractors had concluded their business with the state

and railroad officials and with the lesser contractors, and departed for

the East.  But the serious illness of one of the engineers kept Philip

and Henry in the city and occupied in alternate watchings.



Philip wrote to Ruth of the new acquaintance they had made, Col. Sellers,

an enthusiastic and hospitable gentleman, very much interested in the

development of the country, and in their success.  They had not had an

opportunity to visit at his place "up in the country" yet, but the

Colonel often dined with them, and in confidence, confided to them his

projects, and seemed to take a great liking to them, especially to his

friend Harry.  It was true that he never seemed to have ready money,

but he was engaged in very large operations.



The correspondence was not very brisk between these two young persons,

so differently occupied; for though Philip wrote long letters, he got

brief ones in reply, full of sharp little observations however, such as

one concerning Col. Sellers, namely, that such men dined at their house

every week.



Ruth's proposed occupation astonished Philip immensely, but while he

argued it and discussed it, he did not dare hint to her his fear that it

would interfere with his most cherished plans.  He too sincerely

respected Ruth's judgment to make any protest, however, and he would have

defended her course against the world.



This enforced waiting at St. Louis was very irksome to Philip.  His money

was running away, for one thing, and he longed to get into the field,

and see for himself what chance there was for a fortune or even an

occupation.  The contractors had given the young men leave to join the

engineer corps as soon as they could, but otherwise had made no provision

for them, and in fact had left them with only the most indefinite

expectations of something large in the future.



Harry was entirely happy; in his circumstances.  He very soon knew

everybody, from the governor of the state down to the waiters at the

hotel.  He had the Wall street slang at his tongue's end; he always

talked like a capitalist, and entered with enthusiasm into all the land

and railway schemes with which the air was thick.



Col. Sellers and Harry talked together by the hour and by the day.  Harry

informed his new friend that he was going out with the engineer corps of

the Salt Lick Pacific Extension, but that wasn't his real business.



"I'm to have, with another party," said Harry, "a big contract in the

road, as soon as it is let; and, meantime, I'm with the engineers to spy

out the best land and the depot sites."



"It's everything," suggested' the Colonel, "in knowing where to invest.

I've known people throwaway their money because they  were too

consequential to take Sellers' advice.  Others, again, have made their

pile on taking it.  I've looked over the ground; I've been studying it

for twenty years.  You can't put your finger on a spot in the map of

Missouri that I don't know as if I'd made it.  When you want to place

anything," continued the Colonel, confidently, "just let Beriah Sellers

know.  That's all."



"Oh, I haven't got much in ready money I can lay my hands on now, but if

a fellow could do anything with fifteen or twenty thousand dollars,

as a beginning, I shall draw for that when I see the right opening."



"Well, that's something, that's something, fifteen or twenty thousand

dollars, say twenty--as an advance," said the Colonel reflectively, as if

turning over his mind for a project that could be entered on with such a

trifling sum.



"I'll tell you what it is--but only to you Mr. Brierly, only to you,

mind; I've got a little project that I've been keeping.  It looks small,

looks small on paper, but it's got a big future.  What should you say,

sir, to a city, built up like the rod of Aladdin had touched it, built up

in two years, where now you wouldn't expect it any more than you'd expect

a light-house on the top of Pilot Knob? and you could own the land!  It

can be done, sir.  It can be done!"



The Colonel hitched up his chair close to Harry, laid his hand on his

knee, and, first looking about him, said in a low voice, "The Salt Lick

Pacific Extension is going to run through Stone's Landing!  The Almighty

never laid out a cleaner piece of level prairie for a city; and it's the

natural center of all that region of hemp and tobacco."



"What makes you think the road will go there?  It's twenty miles, on the

map, off the straight line of the road?"



"You can't tell what is the straight line till the engineers have been

over it.  Between us, I have talked with Jeff Thompson, the division

engineer.  He understands the wants of Stone's Landing, and the claims of

the inhabitants--who are to be there.  Jeff says that a railroad is for

--the accommodation of the people and not for the benefit of gophers; and

if, he don't run this to Stone's Landing he'll be damned!  You ought to

know Jeff; he's one of the most enthusiastic engineers in this western

country, and one of the best fellows that ever looked through the bottom

of a glass."



The recommendation was not undeserved.  There was nothing that Jeff

wouldn't do, to accommodate a friend, from sharing his last dollar with

him, to winging him in a duel.  When he understood from Col. Sellers.

how the land lay at Stone's Landing, he cordially shook hands with that

gentleman, asked him to drink, and fairly roared out, "Why, God bless my

soul, Colonel, a word from one Virginia gentleman to another is 'nuff

ced.'  There's Stone's Landing been waiting for a railroad more than four

thousand years, and damme if she shan't have it."



Philip had not so much faith as Harry in Stone's Landing, when the latter

opened the project to him, but Harry talked about it as if he already

owned that incipient city.



Harry thoroughly believed in all his projects and inventions, and lived

day by day in their golden atmosphere.  Everybody liked the young fellow,

for how could they help liking one of such engaging manners and large

fortune?  The waiters at the hotel would do more for him than for any

other guest, and he made a great many acquaintances among the people of

St. Louis, who liked his sensible and liberal views about the development

of the western country, and about St. Louis.  He said it ought to be the

national capital.  Harry made partial arrangements with several of the

merchants for furnishing supplies for his contract on the Salt Lick

Pacific Extension; consulted the maps with the engineers, and went over

the profiles with the contractors, figuring out estimates for bids.

He was exceedingly busy with those things when he was not at the bedside

of his sick acquaintance, or arranging the details of his speculation

with Col. Sellers.



Meantime the days went along and the weeks, and the money in Harry's

pocket got lower and lower.  He was just as liberal with what he had as

before, indeed it was his nature to be free with his money or with that

of others, and he could lend or spend a dollar with an air that made it

seem like ten.  At length, at the end of one week, when his hotel bill

was presented, Harry found not a cent in his pocket to meet it.  He

carelessly remarked to the landlord that he was not that day in funds,

but he would draw on New York, and he sat down and wrote to the

contractors in that city a glowing letter about the prospects of the

road, and asked them to advance a hundred or two, until he got at work.

No reply came.  He wrote again, in an unoffended business like tone,

suggesting that he had better draw at three days.  A short answer came to

this, simply saying that money was very tight in Wall street just then,

and that he had better join the engineer corps as soon as he could.



But the bill had to be paid, and Harry took it to Philip, and asked him

if he thought he hadn't better draw on his uncle.  Philip had not much

faith in Harry's power of "drawing," and told him that he would pay the

bill himself.  Whereupon Harry dismissed the matter then and thereafter

from his thoughts, and, like a light-hearted good fellow as he was, gave

himself no more trouble about his board-bills.  Philip paid them, swollen

as they were with a monstrous list of extras; but he seriously counted

the diminishing bulk of his own hoard, which was all the money he had in

the world.  Had he not tacitly agreed to share with Harry to the last in

this adventure, and would not the generous fellow divide; with him if he,

Philip, were in want and Harry had anything?



The fever at length got tired of tormenting the stout young engineer, who

lay sick at the hotel, and left him, very thin, a little sallow but an

"acclimated" man.  Everybody said he was "acclimated" now, and said it

cheerfully.  What it is to be acclimated to western fevers no two persons

exactly agree.



Some say it is a sort of vaccination that renders death by some malignant

type of fever less probable.  Some regard it as a sort of initiation,

like that into the Odd Fellows, which renders one liable to his regular

dues thereafter.  Others consider it merely the acquisition of a habit of

taking every morning before breakfast a dose of bitters, composed of

whiskey and assafoetida, out of the acclimation jug.



Jeff Thompson afterwards told Philip that he once asked Senator Atchison,

then acting Vice-President: of the United States, about the possibility

of acclimation; he thought the opinion of the second officer of our great

government would be, valuable on this point.  They were sitting together

on a bench before a country tavern, in the free converse permitted by our

democratic habits.



"I suppose, Senator, that you have become acclimated to this country?"



"Well," said the Vice-President, crossing his legs, pulling his

wide-awake down over his forehead, causing a passing chicken to hop

quickly one side by the accuracy of his aim, and speaking with senatorial

deliberation, "I think I have.  I've been here twenty-five years, and

dash, dash my dash to dash, if I haven't entertained twenty-five separate

and distinct earthquakes, one a year.  The niggro is the only person who

can stand the fever and ague of this region."



The convalescence of the engineer was the signal for breaking up quarters

at St. Louis, and the young fortune-hunters started up the river in good

spirits.  It was only the second time either of them had been upon a

Mississippi steamboat, and nearly everything they saw had the charm of

novelty.  Col. Sellers was at the landing to bid thorn good-bye.



"I shall send you up that basket of champagne by the next boat; no, no;

no thanks; you'll find it not bad in camp," he cried out as the plank was

hauled in.  "My respects to Thompson.  Tell him to sight for Stone's.

Let me know, Mr. Brierly, when you are ready to locate; I'll come over

from Hawkeye.  Goodbye."



And the last the young fellows saw of the Colonel, he was waving his hat,

and beaming prosperity and good luck.



The voyage was delightful, and was not long enough to become monotonous.

The travelers scarcely had time indeed to get accustomed to the splendors

of the great saloon where the tables were spread for meals, a marvel of

paint and gilding, its ceiling hung with fancifully cut tissue-paper of

many colors, festooned and arranged in endless patterns.  The whole was

more beautiful than a barber's shop.  The printed bill of fare at dinner

was longer and more varied, the proprietors justly boasted, than that of

any hotel in New York.  It must have been the work of an author of talent

and imagination, and it surely was not his fault if the dinner itself was

to a certain extent a delusion, and if the guests got something that

tasted pretty much the same whatever dish they ordered; nor was it his

fault if a general flavor of rose in all the dessert dishes suggested

that they hid passed through the barber's saloon on their way from the

kitchen.



The travelers landed at a little settlement on the left bank, and at once

took horses for the camp in the interior, carrying their clothes and

blankets strapped behind the saddles.  Harry was dressed as we have seen

him once before, and his long and shining boots attracted not a little

the attention of the few persons they met on the road, and especially of

the bright faced wenches who lightly stepped along the highway,

picturesque in their colored kerchiefs, carrying light baskets, or riding

upon mules and balancing before them a heavier load.



Harry sang fragments of operas and talked abort their fortune.  Philip

even was excited by the sense of freedom and adventure, and the beauty of

the landscape.  The prairie, with its new grass and unending acres of

brilliant flowers--chiefly the innumerable varieties of phlox-bore the

look of years of cultivation, and the occasional open groves of white

oaks gave it a park-like appearance.  It was hardly unreasonable to

expect to see at any moment, the gables and square windows of an

Elizabethan mansion in one of the well kept groves.



Towards sunset of the third day, when the young gentlemen thought they

ought to be near the town of Magnolia, near which they had been directed

to find the engineers' camp, they descried a log house and drew up before

it to enquire the way.  Half the building was store, and half was

dwelling house.  At the door of the latter stood a regress with a bright

turban on her head, to whom Philip called,



"Can you tell me, auntie, how far it is to the town of Magnolia?"



"Why, bress you chile," laughed the woman, "you's dere now."



It was true.  This log horse was the compactly built town, and all

creation was its suburbs.  The engineers' camp was only two or three

miles distant.



"You's boun' to find it," directed auntie, "if you don't keah nuffin

'bout de road, and go fo' de sun-down."



A brisk gallop brought the riders in sight of the twinkling light of the

camp, just as the stars came out.  It lay in a little hollow, where a

small stream ran through a sparse grove of young white oaks.  A half

dozen tents were pitched under the trees, horses and oxen were corraled

at a little distance, and a group of men sat on camp stools or lay on

blankets about a bright fire.  The twang of a banjo became audible as

they drew nearer, and they saw a couple of negroes, from some neighboring

plantation, "breaking down" a juba in approved style, amid the "hi, hi's"

of the spectators.



Mr. Jeff Thompson, for it was the camp of this redoubtable engineer, gave

the travelers a hearty welcome, offered them ground room in his own tent,

ordered supper, and set out a small jug, a drop from which he declared

necessary on account of the chill of the evening.



"I never saw an Eastern man," said Jeff, "who knew how to drink from a

jug with one hand.  It's as easy as lying.  So."  He grasped the handle

with the right hand, threw the jug back upon his arm, and applied his

lips to the nozzle.  It was an act as graceful as it was simple.

"Besides," said Mr. Thompson, setting it down, "it puts every man on his

honor as to quantity."



Early to turn in was the rule of the camp, and by nine o'clock everybody

was under his blanket, except Jeff himself, who worked awhile at his

table over his field-book, and then arose, stepped outside the tent door

and sang, in a strong and not unmelodious tenor, the Star Spangled Banner

from beginning to end.  It proved to be his nightly practice to let off

the unexpended seam of his conversational powers, in the words of this

stirring song.



It was a long time before Philip got to sleep.  He saw the fire light,

he saw the clear stars through the tree-tops, he heard the gurgle of the

stream, the stamp of the horses, the occasional barking of the dog which

followed the cook's wagon, the hooting of an owl; and when these failed

he saw Jeff, standing on a battlement, mid the rocket's red glare, and

heard him sing, "Oh, say, can you see?", It was the first time he had

ever slept on the ground.









CHAPTER XVII.



         ----"We have view'd it,

          And measur'd it within all, by the scale

          The richest tract of land, love, in the kingdom!

          There will be made seventeen or eighteeen millions,

          Or more, as't may be handled!"

                              The Devil is an Ass.



Nobody dressed more like an engineer than Mr. Henry Brierly.  The

completeness of his appointments was the envy of the corps, and the gay

fellow himself was the admiration of the camp servants, axemen, teamsters

and cooks.



"I reckon you didn't git them boots no wher's this side o' Sent Louis?"

queried the tall Missouri youth who acted as commissariy's assistant.



"No, New York."



"Yas, I've heern o' New York," continued the butternut lad, attentively

studying each item of Harry's dress, and endeavoring to cover his design

with interesting conversation.  "'N there's Massachusetts.",



"It's not far off."



"I've heern Massachusetts was a-----of a place.  Les, see, what state's

Massachusetts in?"



"Massachusetts," kindly replied Harry, "is in the state of Boston."



"Abolish'n wan't it?  They must a cost right smart," referring to the

boots.



Harry shouldered his rod and went to the field, tramped over the prairie

by day, and figured up results at night, with the utmost cheerfulness and

industry, and plotted the line on the profile paper, without, however,

the least idea of engineering practical or theoretical.  Perhaps there

was not a great deal of scientific knowledge in the entire corps, nor was

very much needed.  They were making, what is called a preliminary survey,

and the chief object of a preliminary survey was to get up an excitement

about the road, to interest every town in that part of the state in it,

under the belief that the road would run through it, and to get the aid

of every planter upon the prospect that a station would be on his land.



Mr. Jeff Thompson was the most popular engineer who could be found for

this work.  He did not bother himself much about details or

practicabilities of location, but ran merrily along, sighting from the

top of one divide to the top of another, and striking "plumb" every town

site and big plantation within twenty or thirty miles of his route.  In

his own language he "just went booming."



This course gave Harry an opportunity, as he said, to learn the practical

details of engineering, and it gave Philip a chance to see the country,

and to judge for himself what prospect of a fortune it offered.  Both he

and Harry got the "refusal" of more than one plantation as they went

along, and wrote urgent letters to their eastern correspondents, upon the

beauty of the land and the certainty that it would quadruple in value as

soon as the road was finally located.  It seemed strange to them that

capitalists did not flock out there and secure this land.



They had not been in the field over two weeks when Harry wrote to his

friend Col. Sellers that he'd better be on the move, for the line was

certain to go to Stone's Landing.  Any one who looked at the line on the

map, as it was laid down from day to day, would have been uncertain which

way it was going; but Jeff had declared that in his judgment the only

practicable route from the point they then stood on was to follow the

divide to Stone's Landing, and it was generally understood that that town

would be the next one hit.



"We'll make it, boys," said the chief, "if we have to go in a balloon."



And make it they did In less than a week, this indomitable engineer had

carried his moving caravan over slues and branches, across bottoms and

along divides, and pitched his tents in the very heart of the city of

Stone's Landing.



"Well, I'll be dashed," was heard the cheery voice of Mr. Thompson, as he

stepped outside the tent door at sunrise next morning.  "If this don't

get me.  I say, yon, Grayson, get out your sighting iron and see if you

can find old Sellers' town.  Blame me if we wouldn't have run plumb by it

if twilight had held on a little longer.  Oh!  Sterling, Brierly, get up

and see the city.  There's a steamboat just coming round the bend."  And

Jeff roared with laughter.  "The mayor'll be round here to breakfast."



The fellows turned out of the tents, rubbing their eyes, and stared about

them.  They were camped on the second bench of the narrow bottom of a

crooked, sluggish stream, that was some five rods wide in the present

good stage of water.  Before them were a dozen log cabins, with stick and

mud chimneys, irregularly disposed on either side of a not very well

defined road, which did not seem to know its own mind exactly, and, after

straggling through the town, wandered off over the rolling prairie in an

uncertain way, as if it had started for nowhere and was quite likely to

reach its destination.  Just as it left the town, however, it was cheered

and assisted by a guide-board, upon which was the legend "10 Mils to

Hawkeye."



The road had never been made except by the travel over it, and at this

season--the rainy June--it was a way of ruts cut in the black soil, and

of fathomless mud-holes.  In the principal street of the city, it had

received more attention; for hogs; great and small, rooted about in it

and wallowed in it, turning the street into a liquid quagmire which could

only be crossed on pieces of plank thrown here and there.



About the chief cabin, which was the store and grocery of this mart of

trade, the mud was more liquid than elsewhere, and the rude platform in

front of it and the dry-goods boxes mounted thereon were places of refuge

for all the loafers of the place.  Down by the stream was a dilapidated

building which served for a hemp warehouse, and a shaky wharf extended

out from it, into the water.  In fact a flat-boat was there moored by it,

it's setting poles lying across the gunwales.  Above the town the stream

was crossed by a crazy wooden bridge, the supports of which leaned all

ways in the soggy soil; the absence of a plank here and there in the

flooring made the crossing of the bridge faster than a walk an offense

not necessary to be prohibited by law.



"This, gentlemen," said Jeff, "is Columbus River, alias Goose Run.  If it

was widened, and deepened, and straightened, and  made, long enough, it

would be one of the finest rivers in the western country."



As the sun rose and sent his level beams along the stream, the thin

stratum of mist, or malaria, rose also and dispersed, but the light was

not able to enliven the dull water nor give any hint of its apparently

fathomless depth.  Venerable mud-turtles crawled up and roosted upon the

old logs in the stream, their backs glistening in the sun, the first

inhabitants of the metropolis to begin the active business of the day.



It was not long, however, before smoke began to issue from the city

chimneys; and before the engineers, had finished their breakfast they

were the object of the curious inspection of six or eight boys and men,

who lounged into the camp and gazed about them with languid interest,

their hands in their pockets every one.



"Good morning; gentlemen," called out the chief engineer, from the table.



"Good mawning," drawled out the spokesman of the party.  "I allow

thish-yers the railroad, I heern it was a-comin'."



"Yes, this is the railroad; all but the rails and the ironhorse."



"I reckon you kin git all the rails you want oaten my white oak timber

over, thar," replied the first speaker, who appeared to be a man of

property and willing to strike up a trade.



"You'll have to negotiate with the contractors about the rails, sir,"

said Jeff; "here's Mr. Brierly, I've no doubt would like to buy your

rails when the time comes."



"O," said the man, "I thought maybe you'd fetch the whole bilin along

with you.  But if you want rails, I've got em, haint I Eph."



"Heaps," said Eph, without taking his eyes off the group at the table.



"Well," said Mr. Thompson, rising from his seat and moving towards his

tent, "the railroad has come to Stone's Landing, sure; I move we take a

drink on it all round."



The proposal met with universal favor.  Jeff gave prosperity to Stone's

Landing and navigation to Goose Run, and the toast was washed down with

gusto, in the simple fluid of corn; and with the return compliment that a

rail road was a good thing, and that Jeff Thompson was no slouch.



About ten o'clock a horse and wagon was descried making a slow approach

to the camp over the prairie.  As it drew near, the wagon was seen to

contain a portly gentleman, who hitched impatiently forward on his seat,

shook the reins and gently touched up his horse, in the vain attempt to

communicate his own energy to that dull beast, and looked eagerly at the

tents.  When the conveyance at length drew up to Mr. Thompson's door,

the gentleman descended with great deliberation, straightened himself up,

rubbed his hands, and beaming satisfaction from every part of his radiant

frame, advanced to the group that was gathered to welcome him, and which

had saluted him by name as soon as he came within hearing.



"Welcome to Napoleon, gentlemen, welcome.  I am proud to see you here

Mr. Thompson.  You are, looking well Mr. Sterling.  This is the country,

sir.  Right glad to see you Mr. Brierly.  You got that basket of

champagne?  No?  Those blasted river thieves!  I'll never send anything

more by 'em.  The best brand, Roederer.  The last I had in my cellar,

from a lot sent me by Sir George Gore--took him out on a buffalo hunt,

when he visited our, country.  Is always sending me some trifle.  You

haven't looked about any yet, gentlemen?  It's in the rough yet, in the

rough.  Those buildings will all have to come down.  That's the place for

the public square, Court House, hotels, churches, jail--all that sort of

thing.  About where we stand, the deepo.  How does that strike your

engineering eye, Mr. Thompson?  Down yonder the business streets, running

to the wharves.  The University up there, on rising ground, sightly

place, see the river for miles.  That's Columbus river, only forty-nine

miles to the Missouri.  You see what it is, placid, steady, no current to

interfere with navigation, wants widening in places and dredging, dredge

out the harbor and raise a levee in front of the town; made by nature on

purpose for a mart.  Look at all this country, not another building

within ten miles, no other navigable stream, lay of the land points right

here; hemp, tobacco, corn, must come here.  The railroad will do it,

Napoleon won't know itself in a year."



"Don't now evidently," said Philip aside to Harry.  "Have you breakfasted

Colonel?"



"Hastily.  Cup of coffee.  Can't trust any coffee I don't import myself.

But I put up a basket of provisions,--wife would put in a few delicacies,

women always will, and a half dozen of that Burgundy, I was telling you

of Mr. Briefly.  By the way, you never got to dine with me."  And the

Colonel strode away to the wagon and looked under the seat for the

basket.



Apparently it was not there.  For the Colonel raised up the flap, looked

in front and behind, and then exclaimed,



"Confound it.  That comes of not doing a thing yourself.  I trusted to

the women folks to set that basket in the wagon, and it ain't there."



The camp cook speedily prepared a savory breakfast for the Colonel,

broiled chicken, eggs, corn-bread, and coffee, to which he did ample

justice, and topped  off with a drop of Old Bourbon, from Mr. Thompson's

private store, a brand which he said he knew well, he should think it

came from his own sideboard.



While the engineer corps went to the field, to run back a couple of miles

and ascertain, approximately, if a road could ever get down to the

Landing, and to sight ahead across the Run, and see if it could ever get

out again, Col. Sellers and Harry sat down and began to roughly map out

the city of Napoleon on a large piece of drawing paper.



"I've got the refusal of a mile square here," said the Colonel, "in our

names, for a year, with a quarter interest reserved for the four owners."



They laid out the town liberally, not lacking room, leaving space for the

railroad to come in, and for the river as it was to be when improved.



The engineers reported that the railroad could come in, by taking a

little sweep and crossing the stream on a high bridge, but the grades

would be steep.  Col. Sellers said he didn't care so much about the

grades, if the road could only be made to reach the elevators on the

river.  The next day Mr. Thompson made a hasty survey of the stream for a

mile or two, so that the Colonel and Harry were enabled to show on their

map how nobly that would accommodate the city.  Jeff took a little

writing from the Colonel and Harry for a prospective share but Philip

declined to join in, saying that he had no money, and didn't want to make

engagements he couldn't fulfill.



The next morning the camp moved on, followed till it was out of sight by

the listless eyes of the group in front of the store, one of whom

remarked that, "he'd be doggoned if he ever expected to see that railroad

any mo'."



Harry went with the Colonel to Hawkeye to complete their arrangements, a

part of which was the preparation of a petition to congress for the

improvement of the navigation of Columbus River.









CHAPTER XVIII.



Eight years have passed since the death of Mr. Hawkins.  Eight years are

not many in the life of a nation or the history of a state, but they

maybe years of destiny that shall fix the current of the century

following.  Such years were those that followed the little scrimmage on

Lexington Common.  Such years were those that followed the double-shotted

demand for the surrender of Fort Sumter.  History is never done with

inquiring of these years, and summoning witnesses about them, and trying

to understand their significance.



The eight years in America from 1860 to 1868 uprooted institutions that

were centuries old, changed the politics of a people, transformed the

social life of half the country, and wrought so profoundly upon the

entire national character that the influence cannot be measured short of

two or three generations.



As we are accustomed to interpret the economy of providence, the life of

the individual is as nothing to that of the nation or the race; but who

can say, in the broader view and the more intelligent weight of values,

that the life of one man is not more than that of a nationality, and that

there is not a tribunal where the tragedy of one human soul shall not

seem more significant than the overturning of any human institution

whatever?



When one thinks of the tremendous forces of the upper and the nether

world which play for the mastery of the soul of a woman during the few

years in which she passes from plastic girlhood to the ripe maturity of

womanhood, he may well stand in awe before the momentous drama.



What capacities she has of purity, tenderness, goodness; what capacities

of vileness, bitterness and evil.  Nature must needs be lavish with the

mother and creator of men, and centre in her all the possibilities of

life.  And a few critical years can decide whether her life is to be full

of sweetness and light, whether she is to be the vestal of a holy temple,

or whether she will be the fallen priestess of a desecrated shrine.

There are women, it is true, who seem to be capable neither of rising

much nor of falling much, and whom a conventional life saves from any

special development of character.



But Laura was not one of them.  She had the fatal gift of beauty, and

that more fatal gift which does not always accompany mere beauty, the

power of fascination, a power that may, indeed, exist without beauty.

She had will, and pride and courage and ambition, and she was left to be

very much her own guide at the age when romance comes to the aid of

passion, and when the awakening powers of her vigorous mind had little

object on which to discipline themselves.



The tremendous conflict that was fought in this girl's soul none of those

about her knew, and very few knew that her life had in it anything

unusual or romantic or strange.



Those were troublous days in Hawkeye as well as in most other Missouri

towns, days of confusion, when between Unionist and Confederate

occupations, sudden maraudings and bush-whackings and raids, individuals

escaped observation or comment in actions that would have filled the town

with scandal in quiet times.



Fortunately we only need to deal with Laura's life at this period

historically, and look back upon such portions of it as will serve to

reveal the woman as she was at the time of the arrival of Mr. Harry

Brierly in Hawkeye.



The Hawkins family were settled there, and had a hard enough struggle

with poverty and the necessity of keeping up appearances in accord with

their own family pride and the large expectations they secretly cherished

of a fortune in the Knobs of East Tennessee.  How pinched they were

perhaps no one knew but Clay, to whom they looked for almost their whole

support.  Washington had been in Hawkeye off and on, attracted away

occasionally by some tremendous speculation, from which he invariably

returned to Gen. Boswell's office as poor as he went.  He was the

inventor of no one knew how many useless contrivances, which were not

worth patenting, and his years had been passed in dreaming and planning

to no purpose; until he was now a man of about thirty, without a

profession or a permanent occupation, a tall, brown-haired, dreamy person

of the best intentions and the frailest resolution.  Probably however

the, eight years had been happier to him than to any others in his

circle, for the time had been mostly spent in a blissful dream of the

coming of enormous wealth.



He went out with a company from Hawkeye to the war, and was not wanting

in courage, but he would have been a better soldier if he had been less

engaged in contrivances for circumventing the enemy by strategy unknown

to the books.



It happened to him to be captured in one of his self-appointed

expeditions, but the federal colonel released him, after a short

examination, satisfied that he could most injure the confederate forces

opposed to the Unionists by returning him to his regiment.  Col. Sellers

was of course a prominent man during the war.  He was captain of the home

guards in Hawkeye, and he never left home except upon one occasion, when

on the strength of a rumor, he executed a flank movement and fortified

Stone's Landing, a place which no one unacquainted with the country would

be likely to find.



"Gad," said the Colonel afterwards, "the Landing is the key to upper

Missouri, and it is the only place the enemy never captured.  If other

places had been defended as well as that was, the result would have been

different, sir."



The Colonel had his own theories about war as he had in other things.

If everybody had stayed at home as he did, he said, the South never would

have been conquered.  For what would there have been to conquer?  Mr.

Jeff Davis was constantly writing him to take command of a corps in the

confederate army, but Col. Sellers said, no, his duty was at home.  And

he was by no means idle.  He was the inventor of the famous air torpedo,

which came very near destroying the Union armies in Missouri, and the

city of St. Louis itself.



His plan was to fill a torpedo with Greek fire and poisonous and deadly

missiles, attach it to a balloon, and then let it sail away over the

hostile camp and explode at the right moment, when the time-fuse burned

out.  He intended to use this invention in the capture of St. Louis,

exploding his torpedoes over the city, and raining destruction upon it

until the army of occupation would gladly capitulate.  He was unable to

procure the Greek fire, but he constructed a vicious torpedo which would

have answered the purpose, but the first one prematurely exploded in his

wood-house, blowing it clean away, and setting fire to his house.  The

neighbors helped him put out the conflagration, but they discouraged any

more experiments of that sort.



The patriotic old gentleman, however, planted so much powder and so many

explosive contrivances in the roads leading into Hawkeye, and then forgot

the exact spots of danger, that people were afraid to travel the

highways, and used to come to town across the fields, The Colonel's motto

was, "Millions for defence but not one cent for tribute."



When Laura came to Hawkeye she might have forgotten the annoyances of the

gossips of Murpheysburg and have out lived the bitterness that was

growing in her heart, if she had been thrown less upon herself, or if the

surroundings of her life had been more congenial and helpful.  But she

had little society, less and less as she grew older that was congenial to

her, and her mind preyed upon itself; and the mystery of her birth at

once chagrined her and raised in her the most extravagant expectations.

She was proud and she felt the sting of poverty.  She could not but be

conscious of her beauty also, and she was vain of that, and came to take

a sort of delight in the exercise of her fascinations upon the rather

loutish young men who came in her way and whom she despised.



There was another world opened to her--a world of books.  But it was not

the best world of that sort, for the small libraries she had access to in

Hawkeye were decidedly miscellaneous, and largely made up of romances and

fictions which fed her imagination with the most exaggerated notions of

life, and showed her men and women in a very false sort of heroism.  From

these stories she learned what a woman of keen intellect and some culture

joined to beauty and fascination of manner, might expect to accomplish in

society as she read of it; and along with these ideas she imbibed other

very crude ones in regard to the emancipation of woman.



There were also other books-histories, biographies of distinguished

people, travels in far lands, poems, especially those of Byron, Scott and

Shelley and Moore, which she eagerly absorbed, and appropriated therefrom

what was to her liking.  Nobody in Hawkeye had read so much or, after a

fashion, studied so diligently as Laura.  She passed for an accomplished

girl, and no doubt thought herself one, as she was, judged by any

standard near her.



During the war there came to Hawkeye a confederate officer, Col. Selby,

who was stationed there for a time, in command of that district.  He was

a handsome, soldierly man of thirty years, a graduate of the University

of Virginia, and of distinguished family, if his story might be believed,

and, it was evident, a man of the world and of extensive travel and

adventure.



To find in such an out of the way country place a woman like Laura was a

piece of good luck upon which Col. Selby congratulated himself.  He was

studiously polite to her and treated her with a consideration to which

she was unaccustomed.  She had read of such men, but she had never seen

one before, one so high-bred, so noble in sentiment, so entertaining in

conversation, so engaging in manner.



It is a long story; unfortunately it is an old story, and it need not be

dwelt on.  Laura loved him, and believed that his love for her was as

pure and deep as her own.  She worshipped him and would have counted her

life a little thing to give him, if he would only love her and let her

feed the hunger of her heart upon him.



The passion possessed her whole being, and lifted her up, till she seemed

to walk on air.  It was all true, then, the romances she had read, the

bliss of love she had dreamed of.  Why had she never noticed before how

blithesome the world was, how jocund with love; the birds sang it, the

trees whispered it to her as she passed, the very flowers beneath her

feet strewed the way as for a bridal march.



When the Colonel went away they were engaged to be married, as soon as he

could make certain arrangements which he represented to be necessary, and

quit the army.  He wrote to her from Harding, a small town in the

southwest corner of the state, saying that he should be held in the

service longer than he had expected, but that it would not be more than a

few months, then he should be at liberty to take her to Chicago where he

had property, and should have business, either now or as soon as the war

was over, which he thought could not last long.  Meantime why should they

be separated?  He was established in comfortable quarters, and if she

could find company and join him, they would be married, and gain so many

more months of happiness.



Was woman ever prudent when she loved?  Laura went to Harding, the

neighbors supposed to nurse Washington who had fallen ill there.

Her engagement was, of course, known in Hawkeye, and was indeed a matter

of pride to her family.  Mrs. Hawkins would have told the first inquirer

that.  Laura had gone to be married; but Laura had cautioned her; she did

not want to be thought of, she said, as going in search of a husband; let

the news come back after she was married.



So she traveled to Harding on the pretence we have mentioned, and was

married.  She was married, but something must have happened on that very

day or the next that alarmed her.  Washington did not know then or after

what it was, but Laura bound him not to send news of her marriage to

Hawkeye yet, and to enjoin her mother not to speak of it.  Whatever cruel

suspicion or nameless dread this was, Laura tried bravely to put it away,

and not let it cloud her happiness.



Communication that summer, as may be imagined, was neither regular nor

frequent between the remote confederate camp at Harding and Hawkeye, and

Laura was in a measure lost sight of--indeed, everyone had troubles

enough of his own without borrowing from his neighbors.



Laura had given herself utterly to her husband, and if he had faults, if

he was selfish, if he was sometimes coarse, if he was dissipated, she did

not or would not see it.  It was the passion of her life, the time when

her whole nature went to flood tide and swept away all barriers.  Was her

husband ever cold or indifferent?  She shut her eyes to everything but

her sense of possession of her idol.



Three months passed.  One morning her husband informed her that he had

been ordered South, and must go within two hours.



"I can be ready," said Laura, cheerfully.



"But I can't take you.  You must go back to Hawkeye."



"Can't-take-me?" Laura asked, with wonder in her eyes.  "I can't live

without you.  You said-----"



"O bother what I said,"--and the Colonel took up his sword to buckle it

on, and then continued coolly, "the fact is Laura, our romance is played

out."



Laura heard, but she did not comprehend.  She caught his arm and cried,

"George, how can you joke so cruelly?  I will go any where with you.

I will wait any where.  I can't go back to Hawkeye."



"Well, go where you like.  Perhaps," continued he with a sneer, "you

would do as well to wait here, for another colonel."



Laura's brain whirled.  She did not yet comprehend.  "What does this

mean?  Where are you going?"



"It means," said the officer, in measured words, "that you haven't

anything to show for a legal marriage, and that I am going to New

Orleans."



"It's a lie, George, it's a lie.  I am your wife.  I shall go.  I shall

follow you to New Orleans."



"Perhaps my wife might not like it!"



Laura raised her head, her eyes flamed with fire, she tried to utter a

cry, and fell senseless on the floor.



When she came to herself the Colonel was gone.  Washington Hawkins stood

at her bedside.  Did she come to herself?  Was there anything left in her

heart but hate and bitterness, a sense of an infamous wrong at the hands

of the only man she had ever loved?



She returned to Hawkeye.  With the exception of Washington and his

mother, no one knew what had happened.  The neighbors supposed that the

engagement with Col. Selby had fallen through.  Laura was ill for a long

time, but she recovered; she had that resolution in her that could

conquer death almost.  And with her health came back her beauty, and an

added fascination, a something that might be mistaken for sadness.  Is

there a beauty in the knowledge of evil, a beauty that shines out in the

face of a person whose inward life is transformed by some terrible

experience?  Is the pathos in the eyes of the Beatrice Cenci from her

guilt or her innocence?



Laura was not much changed.  The lovely woman had a devil in her heart.

That was all.









CHAPTER XIX.



Mr. Harry Brierly drew his pay as an engineer while he was living at the

City Hotel in Hawkeye.  Mr. Thompson had been kind enough to say that it

didn't make any difference whether he was with the corps or not; and

although Harry protested to the Colonel daily and to Washington Hawkins

that he must go back at once to the line and superintend the lay-out with

reference to his contract, yet he did not go, but wrote instead long

letters to Philip, instructing him to keep his eye out, and to let him

know when any difficulty occurred that required his presence.



Meantime Harry blossomed out in the society of Hawkeye, as he did in any

society where fortune cast him and he had the slightest opportunity to

expand.  Indeed the talents of a rich and accomplished young fellow like

Harry were not likely to go unappreciated in such a place.  A land

operator, engaged in vast speculations, a favorite in the select circles

of New York, in correspondence with brokers and bankers, intimate with

public men at Washington, one who could play the guitar and touch the

banjo lightly, and who had an eye for a pretty girl, and knew the

language of flattery, was welcome everywhere in Hawkeye.  Even Miss Laura

Hawkins thought it worth while to use her fascinations upon him, and to

endeavor to entangle the volatile fellow in the meshes of her

attractions.



"Gad," says Harry to the Colonel, "she's a superb creature, she'd make a

stir in New York, money or no money.  There are men I know would give her

a railroad or an opera house, or whatever she wanted--at least they'd

promise."



Harry had a way of looking at women as he looked at anything else in the

world he wanted, and he half resolved to appropriate Miss Laura, during

his stay in Hawkeye.  Perhaps the Colonel divined his thoughts, or was

offended at Harry's talk, for he replied,



"No nonsense, Mr. Brierly.  Nonsense won't do in Hawkeye, not with my

friends.  The Hawkins' blood is good blood, all the way from Tennessee.

The Hawkinses are under the weather now, but their Tennessee property is

millions when it comes into market."



"Of course, Colonel.  Not the least offense intended.  But you can see

she is a fascinating woman.  I was only thinking, as to this

appropriation, now, what such a woman could do in Washington.  All

correct, too, all correct.  Common thing, I assure you in Washington; the

wives of senators, representatives, cabinet officers, all sorts of wives,

and some who are not wives, use their influence.  You want an

appointment?  Do you go to Senator X?  Not much.  You get on the right

side of his wife.  Is it an appropriation?  You'd go 'straight to the

Committee, or to the Interior office, I suppose?  You'd learn better than

that.  It takes a woman to get any thing through the Land Office: I tell

you, Miss Laura would fascinate an appropriation right through the Senate

and the House of Representatives in one session, if she was in

Washington, as your friend, Colonel, of course as your friend."



"Would you have her sign our petition?" asked the Colonel, innocently.



Harry laughed.  "Women don't get anything by petitioning Congress; nobody

does, that's for form.  Petitions are referred somewhere, and that's the

last of them; you can't refer a handsome woman so easily, when she is

present.  They prefer 'em mostly."



The petition however was elaborately drawn up, with a glowing description

of Napoleon and the adjacent country, and a statement of the absolute

necessity to the prosperity of that region and of one of the stations on

the great through route to the Pacific, of the, immediate improvement of

Columbus River; to this was appended a map of the city and a survey of

the river.  It was signed by all the people at Stone's Landing who could

write their names, by Col. Beriah Sellers, and the Colonel agreed to have

the names headed by all the senators and representatives from the state

and by a sprinkling of ex-governors and ex-members of congress.  When

completed it was a formidable document.  Its preparation and that of more

minute plots of the new city consumed the valuable time of Sellers and

Harry for many weeks, and served to keep them both in the highest

spirits.



In the eyes of Washington Hawkins, Harry was a superior being, a man who

was able to bring things to pass in a way that excited his enthusiasm.

He never tired of listening to his stories of what he had done and of

what he was going to do.  As for Washington, Harry thought he was a man

of ability and comprehension, but "too visionary," he told the Colonel.

The Colonel said he might be right, but he had never noticed anything

visionary about him.



"He's got his plans, sir.  God bless my soul, at his age, I was full of

plans.  But experience sobers a man, I never touch any thing now that

hasn't been weighed in my judgment; and when Beriah Sellers puts his

judgment on a thing, there it is."



Whatever might have been Harry's intentions with regard to Laura, he saw

more and more of her every day, until he got to be restless and nervous

when he was not with her.



That consummate artist in passion allowed him to believe that the

fascination was mainly on his side, and so worked upon his vanity, while

inflaming his ardor, that he scarcely knew what he was about.  Her

coolness and coyness were even made to appear the simple precautions of a

modest timidity, and attracted him even more than the little tendernesses

into which she was occasionally surprised.  He could never be away from

her long, day or evening; and in a short time their intimacy was the town

talk.  She played with him so adroitly that Harry thought she was

absorbed in love for him, and yet he was amazed that he did not get on

faster in his conquest.



And when he thought of it, he was piqued as well.  A country girl, poor

enough, that was evident; living with her family in a cheap and most

unattractive frame house, such as carpenters build in America, scantily

furnished and unadorned; without the adventitious aids of dress or jewels

or the fine manners of society--Harry couldn't understand it.  But she

fascinated him, and held him just beyond the line of absolute familiarity

at the same time.  While he was with her she made him forget that the

Hawkins' house was nothing but a wooden tenement, with four small square

rooms on the ground floor and a half story; it might have been a palace

for aught he knew.



Perhaps Laura was older than Harry.  She was, at any rate, at that ripe

age when beauty in woman seems more solid than in the budding period of

girlhood, and she had come to understand her powers perfectly, and to

know exactly how much of the susceptibility and archness of the girl it

was profitable to retain.  She saw that many women, with the best

intentions, make a mistake of carrying too much girlishness into

womanhood.  Such a woman would have attracted Harry at any time, but only

a woman with a cool brain and exquisite art could have made him lose his

head in this way; for Harry thought himself a man of the world.  The

young fellow never dreamed that he was merely being experimented on; he

was to her a man of another society and another culture, different from

that she had any knowledge of except in books, and she was not unwilling

to try on him the fascinations of her mind and person.



For Laura had her dreams.  She detested the narrow limits in which her

lot was cast, she hated poverty.  Much of her reading had been of modern

works of fiction, written by her own sex, which had revealed to her

something of her own powers and given her indeed, an exaggerated notion

of the influence, the wealth, the position a woman may attain who has

beauty and talent and ambition and a little culture, and is not too

scrupulous in the use of them.  She wanted to be rich, she wanted luxury,

she wanted men at her feet, her slaves, and she had not--thanks to some

of the novels she had read--the nicest discrimination between notoriety

and reputation; perhaps she did not know how fatal notoriety usually is

to the bloom of womanhood.



With the other Hawkins children Laura had been brought up in the belief

that they had inherited a fortune in the Tennessee Lands.  She did not by

any means share all the delusion of the family; but her brain was not

seldom busy with schemes about it.  Washington seemed to her only to

dream of it and to be willing to wait for its riches to fall upon him in

a golden shower; but she was impatient, and wished she were a man to take

hold of the business.



"You men must enjoy your schemes and your activity and liberty to go

about the world," she said to Harry one day, when he had been talking of

New York and Washington and his incessant engagements.



"Oh, yes," replied that martyr to business, "it's all well enough, if you

don't have too much of it, but it only has one object."



"What is that?"



"If a woman doesn't know, it's useless to tell her.  What do you suppose

I am staying in Hawkeye for, week after week, when I ought to be with my

corps?"



"I suppose it's your business with Col. Sellers about Napoleon, you've

always told me so," answered Laura, with a look intended to contradict

her words.



"And now I tell you that is all arranged, I suppose you'll tell me I

ought to go?"



"Harry!" exclaimed Laura, touching his arm and letting her pretty hand

rest there a moment.  "Why should I want you to go away?  The only person

in Hawkeye who understands me."



"But you refuse to understand me," replied Harry, flattered but still

petulant.  "You are like an iceberg, when we are alone."



Laura looked up with wonder in her great eyes, and something like a blush

suffusing her face, followed by a look of langour that penetrated Harry's

heart as if it had been longing.



"Did I ever show any want of confidence in you, Harry?"  And she gave him

her hand, which Harry pressed with effusion--something in her manner told

him that he must be content with that favor.



It was always so.  She excited his hopes and denied him, inflamed his

passion and restrained it, and wound him in her toils day by day.  To

what purpose?  It was keen delight to Laura to prove that she had power

over men.



Laura liked to hear about life at the east, and especially about the

luxurious society in which Mr. Brierly moved when he was at home.  It

pleased her imagination to fancy herself a queen in it.



"You should be a winter in Washington," Harry said.



"But I have no acquaintances there."



"Don't know any of the families of the congressmen?  They like to have a

pretty woman staying with them."



"Not one."



"Suppose Col. Sellers should, have business there; say, about this

Columbus River appropriation?"



"Sellers!" and Laura laughed.



"You needn't laugh.  Queerer things have happened.  Sellers knows

everybody from Missouri, and from the West, too, for that matter.  He'd

introduce you to Washington life quick enough.  It doesn't need a crowbar

to break your way into society there as it does in Philadelphia.  It's

democratic, Washington is.  Money or beauty will open any door.  If I

were a handsome woman, I shouldn't want any better place than the capital

to pick up a prince or a fortune."



"Thank you," replied Laura.  "But I prefer the quiet of home, and the

love of those I know;" and her face wore a look of sweet contentment and

unworldliness that finished Mr. Harry Brierly for the day.



Nevertheless, the hint that Harry had dropped fell upon good ground, and

bore fruit an hundred fold; it worked in her mind until she had built up

a plan on it, and almost a career for herself.  Why not, she said, why

shouldn't I do as other women have done?  She took the first opportunity

to see Col. Sellers, and to sound him about the Washington visit.  How

was he getting on with his navigation scheme, would it be likely to take

him from home to Jefferson City; or to Washington, perhaps?



"Well, maybe.  If the people of Napoleon want me to go to Washington, and

look after that matter, I might tear myself from my home.  It's been

suggested to me, but--not a word of it to Mrs. Sellers and the children.

Maybe they wouldn't like to think of their father in Washington.  But

Dilworthy, Senator Dilworthy, says to me, 'Colonel, you are the man, you

could influence more votes than any one else on such a measure, an old

settler, a man of the people, you know the wants of Missouri; you've a

respect for religion too, says he, and know how the cause of the gospel

goes with improvements: Which is true enough, Miss Laura, and hasn't been

enough thought of in connection with Napoleon.  He's an able man,

Dilworthy, and a good man.  A man has got to be good to succeed as he

has.  He's only been in Congress a few years, and he must be worth a

million.  First thing in the morning when he stayed with me he asked

about family prayers, whether we had 'em before or after breakfast.

I hated to disappoint the Senator, but I had to out with it, tell him we

didn't have 'em, not steady.  He said he understood, business

interruptions and all that, some men were well enough without, but as for

him he never neglected the ordinances of religion.  He doubted if the

Columbus River appropriation would succeed if we did not invoke the

Divine Blessing on it."



Perhaps it is unnecessary to say to the reader that Senator Dilworthy had

not stayed with Col. Sellers while he was in Hawkeye; this visit to his

house being only one of the Colonel's hallucinations--one of those

instant creations of his fertile fancy, which were always flashing into

his brain and out of his mouth in the course of any conversation and

without interrupting the flow of it.



During the summer Philip rode across the country and made a short visit

in Hawkeye, giving Harry an opportunity to show him the progress that he

and the Colonel had made in their operation at Stone's Landing, to

introduce him also to Laura, and to borrow a little money when he

departed.  Harry bragged about his conquest, as was his habit, and took

Philip round to see his western prize.



Laura received Mr. Philip with a courtesy and a slight hauteur that

rather surprised and not a little interested him.  He saw at once that

she was older than Harry, and soon made up his mind that she was leading

his friend a country dance to which he was unaccustomed.  At least he

thought he saw that, and half hinted as much to Harry, who flared up at

once; but on a second visit Philip was not so sure, the young lady was

certainly kind and friendly and almost confiding with Harry, and treated

Philip with the greatest consideration.  She deferred to his opinions,

and listened attentively when he talked, and in time met his frank manner

with an equal frankness, so that he was quite convinced that whatever she

might feel towards Harry, she was sincere with him.  Perhaps his manly

way did win her liking.  Perhaps in her mind, she compared him with

Harry, and recognized in him a man to whom a woman might give her whole

soul, recklessly and with little care if she lost it.  Philip was not

invincible to her beauty nor to the intellectual charm of her presence.



The week seemed very short that he passed in Hawkeye, and when he bade

Laura good by, he seemed to have known her a year.



"We shall see you again, Mr. Sterling," she said as she gave him her

hand, with just a shade of sadness in her handsome eyes.



And when he turned away she followed him with a look that might have

disturbed his serenity, if he had not at the moment had a little square

letter in his breast pocket, dated at Philadelphia, and signed "Ruth."









CHAPTER XX.



The visit of Senator Abner Dilworthy was an event in Hawkeye.  When a

Senator, whose place is in Washington moving among the Great and guiding

the destinies of the nation, condescends to mingle among the people and

accept the hospitalities of such a place as Hawkeye, the honor is not

considered a light one.  All, parties are flattered by it and politics

are forgotten in the presence of one so distinguished among his fellows.



Senator Dilworthy, who was from a neighboring state, had been a Unionist

in the darkest days of his country, and had thriven by it, but was that

any reason why Col. Sellers, who had been a confederate and had not

thriven by it, should give him the cold shoulder?



The Senator was the guest of his old friend Gen. Boswell, but it almost

appeared that he was indebted to Col. Sellers for the unreserved

hospitalities of the town.  It was the large hearted Colonel who, in a

manner, gave him the freedom of the city.



"You are known here, sir," said the Colonel, "and Hawkeye is proud of

you.  You will find every door open, and a welcome at every hearthstone.

I should insist upon your going to my house, if you were not claimed by

your older friend Gen. Boswell.  But you will mingle with our people, and

you will see here developments that will surprise you."



The Colonel was so profuse in his hospitality that he must have made the

impression upon himself that he had entertained the Senator at his own

mansion during his stay; at any rate, he afterwards always spoke of him

as his guest, and not seldom referred to the Senator's relish of certain

viands on his table.  He did, in fact, press him to dine upon the morning

of the day the Senator was going away.



Senator Dilworthy was large and portly, though not tall--a pleasant

spoken man, a popular man with the people.



He took a lively interest in the town and all the surrounding country,

and made many inquiries as to the progress of agriculture, of education,

and of religion, and especially as to the condition of the emancipated

race.



"Providence," he said, "has placed them in our hands, and although you

and I, General, might have chosen a different destiny for them, under the

Constitution, yet Providence knows best."



"You can't do much with 'em," interrupted Col. Sellers.  "They are a

speculating race, sir, disinclined to work for white folks without

security, planning how to live by only working for themselves.  Idle,

sir, there's my garden just a ruin of weeds.  Nothing practical in 'em."



"There is some truth in your observation, Colonel, but you must educate

them."



"You educate the niggro and you make him more speculating than he was

before.  If he won't stick to any industry except for himself now, what

will he do then?"



"But, Colonel, the negro when educated will be more able to make his

speculations fruitful."



"Never, sir, never.  He would only have a wider scope to injure himself.

A niggro has no grasp, sir.  Now, a white man can conceive great

operations, and carry them out; a niggro can't."



"Still," replied the Senator, "granting that he might injure himself in a

worldly point of view, his elevation through education would multiply his

chances for the hereafter--which is the important thing after all,

Colonel.  And no matter what the result is, we must fulfill our duty by

this being."



"I'd elevate his soul," promptly responded the Colonel; "that's just it;

you can't make his soul too immortal, but I wouldn't touch him, himself.

Yes, sir!  make his soul immortal, but don't disturb the niggro as he

is."



Of course one of the entertainments offered the Senator was a public

reception, held in the court house, at which he made a speech to his

fellow citizens.  Col. Sellers was master of ceremonies.  He escorted the

band from the city hotel to Gen. Boswell's; he marshalled the procession

of Masons, of Odd Fellows, and of Firemen, the Good Templars, the Sons of

Temperance, the Cadets of Temperance, the Daughters of Rebecca, the

Sunday School children, and citizens generally, which followed the

Senator to the court house; he bustled about the room long after every

one else was seated, and loudly cried "Order!" in the dead silence which

preceded the introduction of the Senator by Gen. Boswell.  The occasion

was one to call out his finest powers of personal appearance, and one he

long dwelt on with pleasure.



This not being an edition of the Congressional Globe it is impossible to

give Senator Dilworthy's speech in full.  He began somewhat as follows:



"Fellow citizens: It gives me great pleasure to thus meet and mingle with

you, to lay aside for a moment the heavy duties of an official and

burdensome station, and confer in familiar converse with my friends in

your great state.  The good opinion of my fellow citizens of all sections

is the sweetest solace in all my anxieties.  I look forward with longing

to the time when I can lay aside the cares of office--" ["dam sight,"

shouted a tipsy fellow near the door.  Cries of "put him out."]



"My friends, do not remove him.  Let the misguided man stay.  I see that

he is a victim of that evil which is swallowing up public virtue and

sapping the foundation of society.  As I was saying, when I can lay down

the cares of office and retire to the sweets of private life in some such

sweet, peaceful, intelligent, wide-awake and patriotic place as Hawkeye

(applause).  I have traveled much, I have seen all parts of our glorious

union, but I have never seen a lovelier village than yours, or one that

has more signs of commercial and industrial and religious prosperity

--(more applause)."



The Senator then launched into a sketch of our great country, and dwelt

for an hour or more upon its prosperity and the dangers which threatened

it.



He then touched reverently upon the institutions of religion, and upon

the necessity of private purity, if we were to have any public morality.

"I trust," he said, "that there are children within the sound of my

voice," and after some remarks to them, the Senator closed with an

apostrophe to "the genius of American Liberty, walking with the Sunday

School in one hand and Temperance in the other up the glorified steps of

the National Capitol."



Col. Sellers did not of course lose the opportunity to impress upon so

influential a person as the Senator the desirability of improving the

navigation of Columbus river.  He and Mr. Brierly took the Senator over

to Napoleon and opened to him their plan.  It was a plan that the Senator

could understand without a great deal of explanation, for he seemed to be

familiar with the like improvements elsewhere.  When, however, they

reached Stone's Landing the Senator looked about him and inquired,



"Is this Napoleon?"



"This is the nucleus, the nucleus," said the Colonel, unrolling his map.

"Here is the deepo, the church, the City Hall and so on."



"Ah, I see.  How far from here is Columbus River?  Does that stream

empty----"



"That, why, that's Goose Run.  Thar ain't no Columbus, thout'n it's over

to Hawkeye," interrupted one of the citizens, who had come out to stare

at the strangers.  "A railroad come here last summer, but it haint been

here no mo'."



"Yes, sir," the Colonel hastened to explain, "in the old records

Columbus River is called Goose Run.  You see how it sweeps round the

town--forty-nine miles to the Missouri; sloop navigation all the way

pretty much, drains this whole country; when it's improved steamboats

will run right up here.  It's got to be enlarged, deepened.  You see by

the map. Columbus River.  This country must have water communication!"



"You'll want a considerable appropriation, Col. Sellers.



"I should say a million; is that your figure Mr. Brierly."



"According to our surveys," said Harry, "a million would do it; a million

spent on the river would make Napoleon worth two millions at least."



"I see," nodded the Senator.  "But you'd better begin by asking only for

two or three hundred thousand, the usual way.  You can begin to sell town

lots on that appropriation you know."



The Senator, himself, to do him justice, was not very much interested in

the country or the stream, but he favored the appropriation, and he gave

the Colonel and Mr. Brierly to and understand that he would endeavor to

get it through.  Harry, who thought he was shrewd and understood

Washington, suggested an interest.



But he saw that the Senator was wounded by the suggestion.



"You will offend me by repeating such an observation," he said.

"Whatever I do will be for the public interest.  It will require a

portion of the appropriation for necessary expenses, and I am sorry to

say that there are members who will have to be seen.  But you can reckon

upon my humble services."



This aspect of the subject was not again alluded to.  The Senator

possessed himself of the facts, not from his observation of the ground,

but from the lips of Col. Sellers, and laid the appropriation scheme away

among his other plans for benefiting the public.



It was on this visit also that the Senator made the acquaintance of Mr.

Washington Hawkins, and was greatly taken with his innocence, his

guileless manner and perhaps with his ready adaptability to enter upon

any plan proposed.



Col. Sellers was pleased to see this interest that Washington had

awakened, especially since it was likely to further his expectations with

regard to the Tennessee lands; the Senator having remarked to the

Colonel, that he delighted to help any deserving young man, when the

promotion of a private advantage could at the same time be made to

contribute to the general good.  And he did not doubt that this was an

opportunity of that kind.



The result of several conferences with Washington was that the Senator

proposed that he should go to Washington with him and become his private

secretary and the secretary of his committee; a proposal which was

eagerly accepted.



The Senator spent Sunday in Hawkeye and attended church.  He cheered the

heart of the worthy and zealous minister by an expression of his sympathy

in his labors, and by many inquiries in regard to the religious state of

the region.  It was not a very promising state, and the good man felt how

much lighter his task would be, if he had the aid of such a man as

Senator Dilworthy.



"I am glad to see, my dear sir," said the Senator, "that you give them

the doctrines.  It is owing to a neglect of the doctrines, that there is

such a fearful falling away in the country.  I wish that we might have

you in Washington--as chaplain, now, in the senate."



The good man could not but be a little flattered, and if sometimes,

thereafter, in his discouraging work, he allowed the thought that he

might perhaps be called to Washington as chaplain of the Senate, to cheer

him, who can wonder.  The Senator's commendation at least did one service

for him, it elevated him in the opinion of Hawkeye.



Laura was at church alone that day, and Mr. Brierly walked home with her.

A part of their way lay with that of General Boswell and Senator

Dilworthy, and introductions were made.  Laura had her own reasons for

wishing to know the Senator, and the Senator was not a man who could be

called indifferent to charms such as hers.  That meek young lady so

commended herself to him in the short walk, that he announced his

intentions of paying his respects to her the next day, an intention which

Harry received glumly; and when the Senator was out of hearing he called

him "an old fool."



"Fie," said Laura, "I do believe you are jealous, Harry.  He is a very

pleasant man.  He said you were a young man of great promise."



The Senator did call next day, and the result of his visit was that he

was confirmed in his impression that there was something about him very

attractive to ladies.  He saw Laura again and again daring his stay, and

felt more and more the subtle influence of her feminine beauty, which

every man felt who came near her.



Harry was beside himself with rage while the Senator remained in town;

he declared that women were always ready to drop any man for higher game;

and he attributed his own ill-luck to the Senator's appearance.  The

fellow was in fact crazy about her beauty and ready to beat his brains

out in chagrin.  Perhaps Laura enjoyed his torment, but she soothed him

with blandishments that increased his ardor, and she smiled to herself to

think that he had, with all his protestations of love, never spoken of

marriage.  Probably the vivacious fellow never had thought of it.  At any

rate when he at length went away from Hawkeye he was no nearer it.  But

there was no telling to what desperate lengths his passion might not

carry him.



Laura bade him good bye with tender regret, which, however, did not

disturb her peace or interfere with her plans.  The visit of Senator

Dilworthy had become of more importance to her, and it by and by bore the

fruit she longed for, in an invitation to visit his family in the

National Capital during the winter session of Congress.









CHAPTER XXI.



                              O lift your natures up:

               Embrace our aims: work out your freedom.  Girls,

               Knowledge is now no more a fountain sealed;

               Drink deep until the habits of the slave,

               The sins of emptiness, gossip and spite

               And slander, die.

                                   The Princess.



Whether medicine is a science, or only an empirical method of getting a

living out of the ignorance of the human race, Ruth found before her

first term was over at the medical school that there were other things

she needed to know quite as much as that which is taught in medical

books, and that she could never satisfy her aspirations without more

general culture.



"Does your doctor know any thing--I don't mean about medicine, but about

things in general, is he a man of information and good sense?" once asked

an old practitioner.  "If he doesn't know any thing but medicine the

chance is he doesn't know that:"



The close application to her special study was beginning to tell upon

Ruth's delicate health also, and the summer brought with it only

weariness and indisposition for any mental effort.



In this condition of mind and body the quiet of her home and the

unexciting companionship of those about her were more than ever tiresome.



She followed with more interest Philip's sparkling account of his life

in the west, and longed for his experiences, and to know some of those

people of a world so different from here, who alternately amused and

displeased him.  He at least was learning the world, the good and the bad

of it, as must happen to every one who accomplishes anything in it.



But what, Ruth wrote, could a woman do, tied up by custom, and cast into

particular circumstances out of which it was almost impossible to

extricate herself?  Philip thought that he would go some day and

extricate Ruth, but he did not write that, for he had the instinct to

know that this was not the extrication she dreamed of, and that she must

find out by her own experience what her heart really wanted.



Philip was not a philosopher, to be sure, but he had the old fashioned

notion, that whatever a woman's theories of life might be, she would come

round to matrimony, only give her time.  He could indeed recall to mind

one woman--and he never knew a nobler--whose whole soul was devoted and

who believed that her life was consecrated to a certain benevolent

project in singleness of life, who yielded to the touch of matrimony, as

an icicle yields to a sunbeam.



Neither at home nor elsewhere did Ruth utter any complaint, or admit any

weariness or doubt of her ability to pursue the path she had marked out

for herself.  But her mother saw clearly enough her struggle with

infirmity, and was not deceived by either her gaiety or by the cheerful

composure which she carried into all the ordinary duties that fell to

her.  She saw plainly enough that Ruth needed an entire change of scene

and of occupation, and perhaps she believed that such a change, with the

knowledge of the world it would bring, would divert Ruth from a course

for which she felt she was physically entirely unfitted.



It therefore suited the wishes of all concerned, when autumn came, that

Ruth should go away to school.  She selected a large New England

Seminary, of which she had often heard Philip speak, which was attended

by both sexes and offered almost collegiate advantages of education.

Thither she went in September, and began for the second time in the year

a life new to her.



The Seminary was the chief feature of Fallkill, a village of two to three

thousand inhabitants.  It was a prosperous school, with three hundred

students, a large corps of teachers, men and women, and with a venerable

rusty row of academic buildings on the shaded square of the town.  The

students lodged and boarded in private families in the place, and so it

came about that while the school did a great deal to support the town,

the town gave the students society and the sweet influences of home life.

It is at least respectful to say that the influences of home life are

sweet.



Ruth's home, by the intervention of Philip, was in a family--one of the

rare exceptions in life or in fiction--that had never known better days.

The Montagues, it is perhaps well to say, had intended to come over in

the Mayflower, but were detained at Delft Haven by the illness of a

child.  They came over to Massachusetts Bay in another vessel, and thus

escaped the onus of that brevet nobility under which the successors of

the Mayflower Pilgrims have descended.  Having no factitious weight of

dignity to carry, the Montagues steadily improved their condition from

the day they landed, and they were never more vigorous or prosperous than

at the date of this narrative.  With character compacted by the rigid

Puritan discipline of more than two centuries, they had retained its

strength and purity and thrown off its narrowness, and were now

blossoming under the generous modern influences.  Squire Oliver Montague,

a lawyer who had retired from the practice of his profession except in

rare cases, dwelt in a square old fashioned New England mansion a quarter

of a mile away from the green.  It was called a mansion because it stood

alone with ample fields about it, and had an avenue of trees leading to

it from the road, and on the west commanded a view of a pretty little

lake with gentle slopes and nodding were now blossoming under the

generous modern influences.  Squire Oliver Montague, a lawyer who

had retired from the practice of his profession except in rare cases,

dwelt in a square old fashioned New England groves.  But it was just

a plain, roomy house, capable of extending to many guests an

unpretending hospitality.



The family consisted of the Squire and his wife, a son and a daughter

married and not at home, a son in college at Cambridge, another son at

the Seminary, and a daughter Alice, who was a year or more older than

Ruth.  Having only riches enough to be able to gratify reasonable

desires, and yet make their gratifications always a novelty and a

pleasure, the family occupied that just mean in life which is so rarely

attained, and still more rarely enjoyed without discontent.



If Ruth did not find so much luxury in the house as in her own home,

there were evidences of culture, of intellectual activity and of a zest

in the affairs of all the world, which greatly impressed her.  Every room

had its book-cases or book-shelves, and was more or less a library; upon

every table was liable to be a litter of new books, fresh periodicals and

daily newspapers.  There were plants in the sunny windows and some choice

engravings on the walls, with bits of color in oil or water-colors;

the piano was sure to be open and strewn with music; and there were

photographs and little souvenirs here and there of foreign travel.

An absence of any "what-pots" in the corners with rows of cheerful

shells, and Hindoo gods, and Chinese idols, and nests of use less boxes

of lacquered wood, might be taken as denoting a languidness in the family

concerning foreign missions, but perhaps unjustly.



At any rate the life of the world flowed freely into this hospitable

house, and there was always so much talk there of the news of the day,

of the new books and of authors, of Boston radicalism and New York

civilization, and the virtue of Congress, that small gossip stood a very

poor chance.



All this was in many ways so new to Ruth that she seemed to have passed

into another world, in which she experienced a freedom and a mental

exhilaration unknown to her before.  Under this influence she entered

upon her studies with keen enjoyment, finding for a time all the

relaxation she needed, in the charming social life at the Montague house.



It is strange, she wrote to Philip, in one of her occasional letters,

that you never told me more about this delightful family, and scarcely

mentioned Alice who is the life of it, just the noblest girl, unselfish,

knows how to do so many things, with lots of talent, with a dry humor,

and an odd way of looking at things, and yet quiet and even serious

often--one of your "capable" New England girls.  We shall be great

friends.  It had never occurred to Philip that there was any thing

extraordinary about the family that needed mention.  He knew dozens of

girls like Alice, he thought to himself, but only one like Ruth.



Good friends the two girls were from the beginning.  Ruth was a study to

Alice; the product of a culture entirely foreign to her experience, so

much a child in some things, so much a woman in others; and Ruth in turn,

it must be confessed, probing Alice sometimes with her serious grey eyes,

wondered what her object in life was, and whether she had any purpose

beyond living as she now saw her.  For she could scarcely conceive of a

life that should not be devoted to the accomplishment of some definite

work, and she had-no doubt that in her own case everything else would

yield to the professional career she had marked out.



"So you know Philip Sterling," said Ruth one day as the girls sat at

their sewing.  Ruth never embroidered, and never sewed when she could

avoid it.  Bless her.



"Oh yes, we are old friends.  Philip used to come to Fallkill often while

he was in college.  He was once rusticated here for a term."



"Rusticated?"



"Suspended for some College scrape.  He was a great favorite here.

Father and he were famous friends.  Father said that Philip had no end of

nonsense in him and was always blundering into something, but he was a

royal good fellow and would come out all right."



"Did you think he was fickle?"



"Why, I never thought whether he was or not," replied Alice looking up.

"I suppose he was always in love with some girl or another, as college

boys are.  He used to make me his confidant now and then, and be terribly

in the dumps."



"Why did he come to you?" pursued Ruth you were younger than he."



"I'm sure I don't know.  He was at our house a good deal.  Once at a

picnic by the lake, at the risk of his own life, he saved sister Millie

from drowning, and we all liked to have him here.  Perhaps he thought as

he had saved one sister, the other ought to help him when he was in

trouble.  I don't know."



The fact was that Alice was a person who invited confidences, because she

never betrayed them, and gave abundant sympathy in return.  There are

persons, whom we all know, to whom human confidences, troubles and

heart-aches flow as naturally its streams to a placid lake.



This is not a history of Fallkill, nor of the Montague family, worthy as

both are of that honor, and this narrative cannot be diverted into long

loitering with them.  If the reader visits the village to-day, he will

doubtless be pointed out the Montague dwelling, where Ruth lived, the

cross-lots path she traversed to the Seminary, and the venerable chapel

with its cracked bell.



In the little society of the place, the Quaker girl was a favorite, and

no considerable social gathering or pleasure party was thought complete

without her.  There was something in this seemingly transparent and yet

deep character, in her childlike gaiety and enjoyment of the society

about her, and in her not seldom absorption in herself, that would have

made her long remembered there if no events had subsequently occurred to

recall her to mind.



To the surprise of Alice, Ruth took to the small gaieties of the village

with a zest of enjoyment that seemed foreign to one who had devoted her

life to a serious profession from the highest motives.  Alice liked

society well enough, she thought, but there was nothing exciting in that

of Fallkill, nor anything novel in the attentions of the well-bred young

gentlemen one met in it.  It must have worn a different aspect to Ruth,

for she entered into its pleasures at first with curiosity, and then with

interest and finally with a kind of staid abandon that no one would have

deemed possible for her.  Parties, picnics, rowing-matches, moonlight

strolls, nutting expeditions in the October woods,--Alice declared that

it was a whirl of dissipation.  The fondness of Ruth, which was scarcely

disguised, for the company of agreeable young fellows, who talked

nothings, gave Alice opportunity for no end of banter.



"Do you look upon them as I subjects, dear?" she would ask.



And Ruth laughed her merriest laugh, and then looked sober again.

Perhaps she was thinking, after all, whether she knew herself.



If you should rear a duck in the heart of the Sahara, no doubt it would

swim if you brought it to the Nile.



Surely no one would have predicted when Ruth left Philadelphia that she

would become absorbed to this extent, and so happy, in a life so unlike

that she thought she desired.  But no one can tell how a woman will act

under any circumstances.  The reason novelists nearly always fail in

depicting women when they make them act, is that they let them do what

they have observed some woman has done at sometime or another.  And that

is where they make a mistake; for a woman will never do again what has

been done before.  It is this uncertainty that causes women, considered

as materials for fiction, to be so interesting to themselves and to

others.



As the fall went on and the winter, Ruth did not distinguish herself

greatly at the Fallkill Seminary as a student, a fact that apparently

gave her no anxiety, and did not diminish her enjoyment of a new sort of

power which had awakened within her.









CHAPTER XXII.

In mid-winter, an event occurred of unusual interest to the inhabitants

of the Montague house, and to the friends of the young ladies who sought

their society.



This was the arrival at the Sassacua Hotel of two young gentlemen from

the west.



It is the fashion in New England to give Indian names to the public

houses, not that the late lamented savage knew how to keep a hotel, but

that his warlike name may impress the traveler who humbly craves shelter

there, and make him grateful to the noble and gentlemanly clerk if he is

allowed to depart with his scalp safe.



The two young gentlemen were neither students for the Fallkill Seminary,

nor lecturers on physiology, nor yet life assurance solicitors, three

suppositions that almost exhausted the guessing power of the people at

the hotel in respect to the names of "Philip Sterling and Henry Brierly,

Missouri," on the register.  They were handsome enough fellows, that was

evident, browned by out-door exposure, and with a free and lordly way

about them that almost awed the hotel clerk himself.  Indeed, he very

soon set down Mr. Brierly as a gentleman of large fortune, with enormous

interests on his shoulders.  Harry had a way of casually mentioning

western investments, through lines, the freighting business, and the

route through the Indian territory to Lower California, which was

calculated to give an importance to his lightest word.



"You've a pleasant town here, sir, and the most comfortable looking hotel

I've seen out of New York," said Harry to the clerk; "we shall stay here

a few days if you can give us a roomy suite of apartments."



Harry usually had the best of everything, wherever he went, as such

fellows always do have in this accommodating world.  Philip would have

been quite content with less expensive quarters, but there was no

resisting Harry's generosity in such matters.



Railroad surveying and real-estate operations were at a standstill during

the winter in Missouri, and the young men had taken advantage of the lull

to come east, Philip to see if there was any disposition in his friends,

the railway contractors, to give him a share in the Salt Lick Union

Pacific Extension, and Harry to open out to his uncle the prospects of

the new city at Stone's Landing, and to procure congressional

appropriations for the harbor and for making Goose Run navigable.  Harry

had with him a map of that noble stream and of the harbor, with a perfect

net-work of railroads centering in it, pictures of wharves, crowded with

steamboats, and of huge grain-elevators on the bank, all of which grew

out of the combined imaginations of Col. Sellers and Mr. Brierly.  The

Colonel had entire confidence in Harry's influence with Wall street, and

with congressmen, to bring about the consummation of their scheme, and he

waited his return in the empty house at Hawkeye, feeding his pinched

family upon the most gorgeous expectations with a reckless prodigality.



"Don't let 'em into the thing more than is necessary," says the Colonel

to Harry; "give 'em a small interest; a lot apiece in the suburbs of the

Landing ought to do a congressman, but I reckon you'll have to mortgage a

part of the city itself to the brokers."



Harry did not find that eagerness to lend money on Stone's Landing in

Wall street which Col. Sellers had expected, (it had seen too many such

maps as he exhibited), although his uncle and some of the brokers looked

with more favor on the appropriation for improving the navigation of

Columbus River, and were not disinclined to form a company for that

purpose.  An appropriation was a tangible thing, if you could get hold of

it, and it made little difference what it was appropriated for, so long

as you got hold of it.



Pending these weighty negotiations, Philip has persuaded Harry to take a

little run up to Fallkill, a not difficult task, for that young man would

at any time have turned his back upon all the land in the West at sight

of a new and pretty face, and he had, it must be confessed, a facility in

love making which made it not at all an interference with the more

serious business of life.  He could not, to be sure, conceive how Philip

could be interested in a young lady who was studying medicine, but he had

no objection to going, for he did not doubt that there were other girls

in Fallkill who were worth a week's attention.



The young men were received at the house of the Montagues with the

hospitality which never failed there.



"We are glad to see you again," exclaimed the Squire heartily, "you are

welcome Mr. Brierly, any friend of Phil's is welcome at our house"



"It's more like home to me, than any place except my own home," cried

Philip, as he looked about the cheerful house and went through a general

hand-shaking.



"It's a long time, though, since you have been here to say so," Alice

said, with her father's frankness of manner; "and I suspect we owe the

visit now to your sudden interest in the Fallkill Seminary."



Philip's color came, as it had an awkward way of doing in his tell-tale

face, but before he could stammer a reply, Harry came in with,



"That accounts for Phil's wish to build a Seminary at Stone's Landing,

our place in Missouri, when Col. Sellers insisted it should be a

University.  Phil appears to have a weakness for Seminaries."



"It would have been better for your friend Sellers," retorted Philip,

"if he had had a weakness for district schools.  Col. Sellers, Miss

Alice, is a great friend of Harry's, who is always trying to build a

house by beginning at the top."



"I suppose it's as easy to build a University on paper as a Seminary, and

it looks better," was Harry's reflection; at which the Squire laughed,

and said he quite agreed with him.  The old gentleman understood Stone's

Landing a good deal better than he would have done after an hour's talk

with either of it's expectant proprietors.



At this moment, and while Philip was trying to frame a question that he

found it exceedingly difficult to put into words, the door opened

quietly, and Ruth entered.  Taking in the, group with a quick glance, her

eye lighted up, and with a merry smile she advanced and shook hands with

Philip.  She was so unconstrained and sincerely cordial, that it made

that hero of the west feel somehow young, and very ill at ease.



For months and months he had thought of this meeting and pictured it to

himself a hundred times, but he had never imagined it would be like this.

He should meet Ruth unexpectedly, as she was walking alone from the

school, perhaps, or entering the room where he was waiting for her, and

she would cry "Oh!  Phil," and then check herself, and perhaps blush, and

Philip calm but eager and enthusiastic, would reassure her by his warm

manner, and he would take her hand impressively, and she would look up

timidly, and, after his' long absence, perhaps he would be permitted to

Good heavens, how many times he had come to this point, and wondered if

it could happen so.  Well, well; he had never supposed that he should be

the one embarrassed, and above all by a sincere and cordial welcome.



"We heard you were at the Sassacus House," were Ruth's first words; "and

this I suppose is your friend?"



"I beg your pardon," Philip at length blundered out, "this is Mr. Brierly

of whom I have written you."



And Ruth welcomed Harry with a friendliness that Philip thought was due

to his friend, to be sure, but which seemed to him too level with her

reception of himself, but which Harry received as his due from the other

sex.



Questions were asked about the journey and about the West, and the

conversation became a general one, until Philip at length found himself

talking with the Squire in relation to land and railroads and things he

couldn't keep his mind on especially as he heard Ruth and Harry in an

animated discourse, and caught the words "New York," and "opera," and

"reception," and knew that Harry was giving his imagination full range in

the world of fashion.



Harry knew all about the opera, green room and all (at least he said so)

and knew a good many of the operas and could make very entertaining

stories of their plots, telling how the soprano came in here, and the

basso here, humming the beginning of their airs--tum-ti-tum-ti-ti

--suggesting the profound dissatisfaction of the basso recitative--down

--among--the--dead--men--and touching off the whole with an airy grace

quite captivating; though he couldn't have sung a single air through to

save himself, and he hadn't an ear to know whether it was sung correctly.

All the same he doted on the opera, and kept a box there, into which he

lounged occasionally to hear a favorite scene and meet his society

friends.



If Ruth was ever in the city he should be happy to place his box at the

disposal of Ruth and her friends.  Needless to say that she was delighted

with the offer.



When she told Philip of it, that discreet young fellow only smiled, and

said that he hoped she would be fortunate enough to be in New York some

evening when Harry had not already given the use of his private box to

some other friend.



The Squire pressed the visitors to let him send for their trunks and

urged them to stay at his house, and Alice joined in the invitation, but

Philip had reasons for declining.  They staid to supper, however, and in;

the evening Philip had a long talk apart with Ruth, a delightful hour to

him, in which she spoke freely of herself as of old, of her studies at

Philadelphia and of her plans, and she entered into his adventures and

prospects in the West with a genuine and almost sisterly interest; an

interest, however, which did not exactly satisfy Philip--it was too

general and not personal enough to suit him.  And with all her freedom in

speaking of her own hopes, Philip could not, detect any reference to

himself in them; whereas he never undertook anything that he did not

think of Ruth in connection with it, he never made a plan that had not

reference to her, and he never thought of anything as complete if she

could not share it.  Fortune, reputation these had no value to him except

in Ruth's eyes, and there were times when it seemed to him that if Ruth

was not on this earth, he should plunge off into some remote wilderness

and live in a purposeless seclusion.



"I hoped," said Philip; "to get a little start in connection with this

new railroad, and make a little money, so that I could came east and

engage in something more suited to my tastes.  I shouldn't like to live

in the West.  Would you?



"It never occurred to me whether I would or not," was the unembarrassed

reply.  "One of our graduates went to Chicago, and has a nice practice

there.  I don't know where I shall go.  It would mortify mother

dreadfully to have me driving about Philadelphia in a doctor's gig."



Philip laughed at the idea of it.  "And does it seem as necessary to you

to do it as it did before you came to Fallkill?"



It was a home question, and went deeper than Philip knew, for Ruth at

once thought of practicing her profession among the young gentlemen and

ladies of her acquaintance in the village; but she was reluctant to admit

to herself that her notions of a career had undergone any change.



"Oh, I don't think I should come to Fallkill to practice, but I must do

something when I am through school; and why not medicine?"



Philip would like to have explained why not, but the explanation would be

of no use if it were not already obvious to Ruth.



Harry was equally in his element whether instructing Squire Montague

about the investment of capital in Missouri, the improvement of Columbus

River, the project he and some gentlemen in New York had for making a

shorter Pacific connection with the Mississippi than the present one; or

diverting Mrs. Montague with his experience in cooking in camp; or

drawing for Miss Alice an amusing picture of the social contrasts of New

England and the border where he had been. Harry was a very entertaining

fellow, having his imagination to help his memory, and telling his

stories as if he believed them--as perhaps he did. Alice was greatly

amused with Harry and listened so seriously to his romancing that he

exceeded his usual limits.  Chance allusions to his bachelor

establishment in town and the place of his family on the Hudson, could

not have been made by a millionaire, more naturally.



"I should think," queried Alice, "you would rather stay in New York than

to try the rough life at the West you have been speaking of."



"Oh, adventure," says Harry, "I get tired of New York.  And besides I

got involved in some operations that I had to see through.  Parties in

New York only last week wanted me to go down into Arizona in a big

diamond interest.  I told them, no, no speculation for me.  I've got my

interests in Missouri; and I wouldn't leave Philip, as long as he stays

there."



When the young gentlemen were on their way back to the hotel, Mr. Philip,

who was not in very good humor, broke out,



"What the deuce, Harry, did you go on in that style to the Montagues

for?"



"Go on?" cried Harry.  "Why shouldn't I try to make a pleasant evening?

And besides, ain't I going to do those things?  What difference does it

make about the mood and tense of a mere verb?  Didn't uncle tell me only

last Saturday, that I might as well go down to Arizona and hunt for

diamonds?  A fellow might as well make a good impression as a poor one."



"Nonsense.  You'll get to believing your own romancing by and by."



"Well, you'll see.  When Sellers and I get that appropriation, I'll show

you an establishment in town and another on the Hudson and a box at the

opera."



"Yes, it will be like Col. Sellers' plantation at Hawkeye.  Did you ever

see that?"



"Now, don't be cross, Phil.  She's just superb, that little woman.  You

never told me."



"Who's just superb?" growled Philip, fancying this turn of the

conversation less than the other.



"Well, Mrs. Montague, if you must know."  And Harry stopped to light a

cigar, and then puffed on in silence.  The little quarrel didn't last

over night, for Harry never appeared to cherish any ill-will half a

second, and Philip was too sensible to continue a row about nothing; and

he had invited Harry to come with him.



The young gentlemen stayed in Fallkill a week, and were every day at the

Montagues, and took part in the winter gaieties of the village.  There

were parties here and there to which the friends of Ruth and the

Montagues were of course invited, and Harry in the generosity of his

nature, gave in return a little supper at the hotel, very simple indeed,

with dancing in the hall, and some refreshments passed round.  And Philip

found the whole thing in the bill when he came to pay it.



Before the week was over Philip thought he had a new light on the

character of Ruth.  Her absorption in the small gaieties of the society

there surprised him.  He had few opportunities for serious conversation

with her.  There was always some butterfly or another flitting about,

and when Philip showed by his manner that he was not pleased, Ruth

laughed merrily enough and rallied him on his soberness--she declared he

was getting to be grim and unsocial.  He talked indeed more with Alice

than with Ruth, and scarcely concealed from her the trouble that was in

his mind.  It needed, in fact, no word from him, for she saw clearly

enough what was going forward, and knew her sex well enough to know there

was no remedy for it but time.



"Ruth is a dear girl, Philip, and has as much firmness of purpose as

ever, but don't you see she has just discovered that she is fond of

society?  Don't you let her see you are selfish about it, is my advice."



The last evening they were to spend in Fallkill, they were at the

Montagues, and Philip hoped that he would find Ruth in a different mood.

But she was never more gay, and there was a spice of mischief in her eye

and in her laugh.  "Confound it," said Philip to himself, "she's in a

perfect twitter."



He would have liked to quarrel with her, and fling himself out of the

house in tragedy style, going perhaps so far as to blindly wander off

miles into the country and bathe his throbbing brow in the chilling rain

of the stars, as people do in novels; but he had no opportunity.  For

Ruth was as serenely unconscious of mischief as women can be at times,

and fascinated him more than ever with her little demurenesses and

half-confidences.  She even said "Thee" to him once in reproach for a

cutting speech he began.  And the sweet little word made his heart beat

like a trip-hammer, for never in all her life had she said "thee" to him

before.



Was she fascinated with Harry's careless 'bon homie' and gay assurance?

Both chatted away in high spirits, and made the evening whirl along in

the most mirthful manner.  Ruth sang for Harry, and that young gentleman

turned the leaves for her at the piano, and put in a bass note now and

then where he thought it would tell.



Yes, it was a merry evening, and Philip was heartily glad when it was

over, and the long leave-taking with the family was through with.



"Farewell Philip.  Good night Mr. Brierly," Ruth's clear voice sounded

after them as they went down the walk.



And she spoke Harry's name last, thought Philip.









CHAPTER XXIII.



               "O see ye not yon narrow road

               So thick beset wi' thorns and briers?

               That is the Path of Righteousness,

               Though after it but few inquires.



               "And see ye not yon braid, braid road,

               That lies across the lily leven?

               That is the Path of Wickedness,

               Though some call it the road to Heaven."



                                             Thomas the Rhymer.



Phillip and Harry reached New York in very different states of mind.

Harry was buoyant.  He found a letter from Col. Sellers urging him to go

to Washington and confer with Senator Dilworthy.  The petition was in his

hands.



It had been signed by everybody of any importance in Missouri, and would

be presented immediately.



"I should go on myself," wrote the Colonel, "but I am engaged in the

invention of a process for lighting such a city as St. Louis by means of

water; just attach my machine to the water-pipes anywhere and the

decomposition of the fluid begins, and you will have floods of light for

the mere cost of the machine.  I've nearly got the lighting part, but I

want to attach to it a heating, cooking, washing and ironing apparatus.

It's going to be the great thing, but we'd better keep this appropriation

going while I am perfecting it."



Harry took letters to several congressmen from his uncle and from Mr.

Duff Brown, each of whom had an extensive acquaintance in both houses

where they were well known as men engaged in large private operations for

the public good and men, besides, who, in the slang of the day,

understood the virtues of "addition, division and silence."



Senator Dilworthy introduced the petition into the Senate with the remark

that he knew, personally, the signers of it, that they were men

interested; it was true, in the improvement of the country, but he

believed without any selfish motive, and that so far as he knew the

signers were loyal.  It pleased him to see upon the roll the names of

many colored citizens, and it must rejoice every friend of humanity to

know that this lately emancipated race were intelligently taking part in

the development of the resources of their native land.  He moved the

reference of the petition to the proper committee.



Senator Dilworthy introduced his young friend to influential members,

as a person who was very well informed about the Salt Lick Extension of

the Pacific, and was one of the Engineers who had made a careful survey

of Columbus River; and left him to exhibit his maps and plans and to show

the connection between the public treasury, the city of Napoleon and

legislation for the benefit off the whole country.



Harry was the guest of Senator Dilworthy.  There was scarcely any good

movement in which the Senator was not interested.  His house was open to

all the laborers in the field of total abstinence, and much of his time

was taken up in attending the meetings of this cause.  He had a Bible

class in the Sunday school of the church which he attended, and he

suggested to Harry that he might take a class during the time he remained

in Washington, Mr. Washington Hawkins had a class.  Harry asked the

Senator if there was a class of young ladies for him to teach, and after

that the Senator did not press the subject.



Philip, if the truth must be told, was not well satisfied with his

western prospects, nor altogether with the people he had fallen in with.

The railroad contractors held out large but rather indefinite promises.

Opportunities for a fortune he did not doubt existed in Missouri, but for

himself he saw no better means for livelihood than the mastery of the

profession he had rather thoughtlessly entered upon.  During the summer

he had made considerable practical advance in the science of engineering;

he had been diligent, and made himself to a certain extent necessary to

the work he was engaged on.  The contractors called him into their

consultations frequently, as to the character of the country he had been

over, and the cost of constructing the road, the nature of the work, etc.



Still Philip felt that if he was going to make either reputation or money

as an engineer, he had a great deal of hard study before him, and it is

to his credit that he did not shrink from it.  While Harry was in

Washington dancing attendance upon the national legislature and making

the acquaintance of the vast lobby that encircled it, Philip devoted

himself day and night, with an energy and a concentration he was capable

of, to the learning and theory of his profession, and to the science of

railroad building.  He wrote some papers at this time for the "Plow, the

Loom and the Anvil," upon the strength of materials, and especially upon

bridge-building, which attracted considerable attention, and were copied

into the English "Practical Magazine."  They served at any rate to raise

Philip in the opinion of his friends the contractors, for practical men

have a certain superstitious estimation of ability with the pen, and

though they may a little despise the talent, they are quite ready to make

use of it.



Philip sent copies of his performances to Ruth's father and to other

gentlemen whose good opinion he coveted, but he did not rest upon his

laurels.  Indeed, so diligently had he applied himself, that when it came

time for him to return to the West, he felt himself, at least in theory,

competent to take charge of a division in the field.









CHAPTER XXIV.



The capital of the Great Republic was a new world to country-bred

Washington Hawkins.  St. Louis was a greater city, but its floating.

population did not hail from great distances, and so it had the general

family aspect of the permanent population; but Washington gathered its

people from the four winds of heaven, and so the manners, the faces and

the fashions there, presented a variety that was infinite.  Washington

had never been in "society" in St. Louis, and he knew nothing of the ways

of its wealthier citizens and had never inspected one of their dwellings.

Consequently, everything in the nature of modern fashion and grandeur was

a new and wonderful revelation to him.



Washington is an interesting city to any of us.  It seems to become more

and more interesting the oftener we visit it.  Perhaps the reader has

never been there?  Very well.  You arrive either at night, rather too

late to do anything or see anything until morning, or you arrive so early

in the morning that you consider it best to go to your hotel and sleep an

hour or two while the sun bothers along over the Atlantic.  You cannot

well arrive at a pleasant intermediate hour, because the railway

corporation that keeps the keys of the only door that leads into the town

or out of it take care of that.  You arrive in tolerably good spirits,

because it is only thirty-eight miles from Baltimore to the capital, and

so you have only been insulted three times (provided you are not in a

sleeping car--the average is higher there): once when you renewed your

ticket after stopping over in Baltimore, once when you were about to

enter the "ladies' car" without knowing it was a lady's car, and once

When you asked the conductor at what hour you would reach Washington.



You are assailed by a long rank of hackmen who shake their whips in your

face as you step out upon the sidewalk; you enter what they regard as a

"carriage," in the capital, and you wonder why they do not take it out of

service and put it in the museum: we have few enough antiquities, and

it is little to our credit that we make scarcely any effort to preserve

the few we have.  You reach your hotel, presently--and here let us draw

the curtain of charity--because of course you have gone to the wrong one.

You being a stranger, how could you do otherwise?  There are a hundred

and eighteen bad hotels, and only one good one.  The most renowned and

popular hotel of them all is perhaps the worst one known to history.



It is winter, and night.  When you arrived, it was snowing.  When you

reached the hotel, it was sleeting.  When you went to bed, it was

raining.  During the night it froze hard, and the wind blew some chimneys

down.  When you got up in the morning, it was foggy.  When you finished

your breakfast at ten o'clock and went out, the sunshine was brilliant,

the weather balmy and delicious, and the mud and slush deep and

all-pervading.  You will like the climate when you get used to it.



You naturally wish to view the city; so you take an umbrella, an

overcoat, and a fan, and go forth.  The prominent features you soon

locate and get familiar with; first you glimpse the ornamental upper

works of a long, snowy palace projecting above a grove of trees, and a

tall, graceful white dome with a statue on it surmounting the palace and

pleasantly contrasting with the background of blue sky.  That building is

the capitol; gossips will tell you that by the original estimates it was

to cost $12,000,000, and that the government did come within $21,200,000

of building it for that sum.



You stand at the back of the capitol to treat yourself to a view, and it

is a very noble one.  You understand, the capitol stands upon the verge

of a high piece of table land, a fine commanding position, and its front

looks out over this noble situation for a city--but it don't see it, for

the reason that when the capitol extension was decided upon, the property

owners at once advanced their prices to such inhuman figures that the

people went down and built the city in the muddy low marsh behind the

temple of liberty; so now the lordly front of the building, with, its

imposing colonades, its, projecting, graceful wings, its, picturesque

groups of statuary, and its long terraced ranges of steps, flowing down

in white marble waves to the ground, merely looks out upon a sorrowful

little desert of cheap boarding houses.



So you observe, that you take your view from the back of the capitol.

And yet not from the airy outlooks of the dome, by the way, because to

get there you must pass through the great rotunda: and to do that, you

would have to see the marvelous Historical Paintings that hang there,

and the bas-reliefs--and what have you done that you should suffer thus?

And besides, you might have to pass through the old part of the building,

and you could not help seeing Mr. Lincoln, as petrified by a young lady

artist for $10,000--and you might take his marble emancipation

proclamation, which he holds out in his hand and contemplates, for a

folded napkin; and you might conceive from his expression and his

attitude, that he is finding fault with the washing.  Which is not the

case.  Nobody knows what is the matter with him; but everybody feels for

him.  Well, you ought not to go into the dome anyhow, because it would be

utterly impossible to go up there without seeing the frescoes in it--and

why should you be interested in the delirium tremens of art?



The capitol is a very noble and a very beautiful building, both within

and without, but you need not examine it now.  Still, if you greatly

prefer going into the dome, go.  Now your general glance gives you

picturesque stretches of gleaming water, on your left, with a sail here

and there and a lunatic asylum on shore; over beyond the water, on a

distant elevation, you see a squat yellow temple which your eye dwells

upon lovingly through a blur of unmanly moisture, for it recalls your

lost boyhood and the Parthenons done in molasses candy which made it

blest and beautiful.  Still in the distance, but on this side of the

water and close to its edge, the Monument to the Father of his Country

towers out of the mud--sacred soil is the, customary term.  It has the

aspect of a factory chimney with the top broken off.  The skeleton of a

decaying scaffolding lingers about its summit, and tradition says that

the spirit of Washington often comes down and sits on those rafters to

enjoy this tribute of respect which the nation has reared as the symbol

of its unappeasable gratitude.  The Monument is to be finished, some day,

and at that time our Washington will have risen still higher in the

nation's veneration, and will be known as the Great-Great-Grandfather of

his Country.  The memorial Chimney stands in a quiet pastoral locality

that is full of reposeful expression.  With a glass you can see the

cow-sheds about its base, and the contented sheep nimbling pebbles in the

desert solitudes that surround it, and the tired pigs dozing in the holy

calm of its protecting shadow.



Now you wrench your gaze loose, and you look down in front of you and see

the broad Pennsylvania Avenue stretching straight ahead for a mile or

more till it brings up against the iron fence in front of a pillared

granite pile, the Treasury building-an edifice that would command respect

in any capital.  The stores and hotels that wall in this broad avenue are

mean, and cheap, and dingy, and are better left without comment.  Beyond

the Treasury is a fine large white barn, with wide unhandsome grounds

about it.  The President lives there.  It is ugly enough outside, but

that is nothing to what it is inside.  Dreariness, flimsiness, bad taste

reduced to mathematical completeness is what the inside offers to the

eye, if it remains yet what it always has been.



The front and right hand views give you the city at large.  It is a wide

stretch of cheap little brick houses, with here and there a noble

architectural pile lifting itself out of the midst-government buildings,

these.  If the thaw is still going on when you come down and go about

town, you will wonder at the short-sightedness of the city fathers, when

you come to inspect the streets, in that they do not dilute the mud a

little more and use them for canals.



If you inquire around a little, you will find that there are more

boardinghouses to the square acre in Washington than there are in any

other city in the land, perhaps.  If you apply for a home in one of them,

it will seem odd to you to have the landlady inspect you with a severe

eye and then ask you if you are a member of Congress.  Perhaps, just as a

pleasantry, you will say yes.  And then she will tell you that she is

"full."  Then you show her her advertisement in the morning paper, and

there she stands, convicted and ashamed.  She will try to blush, and it

will be only polite in you to take the effort for the deed.  She shows

you her rooms, now, and lets you take one--but she makes you pay in

advance for it.  That is what you will get for pretending to be a member

of Congress.  If you had been content to be merely a private citizen,

your trunk would have been sufficient security for your board.  If you

are curious and inquire into this thing, the chances are that your

landlady will be ill-natured enough to say that the person and property

of a Congressman are exempt from arrest or detention, and that with the

tears in her eyes she has seen several of the people's representatives

walk off to their several States and Territories carrying her unreceipted

board bills in their pockets for keepsakes.  And before you have been in

Washington many weeks you will be mean enough to believe her, too.



Of course you contrive to see everything and find out everything.  And

one of the first and most startling things you find out is, that every

individual you encounter in the City of Washington almost--and certainly

every separate and distinct individual in the public employment, from the

highest bureau chief, clear down to the maid who scrubs Department halls,

the night watchmen of the public buildings and the darkey boy who

purifies the Department spittoons--represents Political Influence.

Unless you can get the ear of a Senator, or a Congressman, or a Chief of

a Bureau or Department, and persuade him to use his "influence" in your

behalf, you cannot get an employment of the most trivial nature in

Washington.  Mere merit, fitness and capability, are useless baggage to

you without "influence."  The population of Washington consists pretty

much entirely of government employee and the people who board them.

There are thousands of these employees, and they have gathered there from

every corner of the Union and got their berths through the intercession

(command is nearer the word) of the Senators and Representatives of their

respective States.  It would be an odd circumstance to see a girl get

employment at three or four dollars a week in one of the great public

cribs without any political grandee to back her, but merely because she

was worthy, and competent, and a good citizen of a free country that

"treats all persons alike."  Washington would be mildly thunderstruck at

such a thing as that.  If you are a member of Congress, (no offence,) and

one of your constituents who doesn't know anything, and does not want to

go into the bother of learning something, and has no money, and no

employment, and can't earn a living, comes besieging you for help, do you

say, "Come, my friend, if your services were valuable you could get

employment elsewhere--don't want you here?"  Oh, no: You take him to a

Department and say, "Here, give this person something to pass away the

time at--and a salary"--and the thing is done.  You throw him on his

country.  He is his country's child, let his country support him.  There

is something good and motherly about Washington, the grand old benevolent

National Asylum for the Helpless.



The wages received by this great hive of employees are placed at the

liberal figure meet and just for skilled and competent labor.  Such of

them as are immediately employed about the two Houses of Congress, are

not only liberally paid also, but are remembered in the customary Extra

Compensation bill which slides neatly through, annually, with the general

grab that signalizes the last night of a session, and thus twenty per

cent. is added to their wages, for--for fun, no doubt.



Washington Hawkins' new life was an unceasing delight to him.  Senator

Dilworthy lived sumptuously, and Washington's quarters were charming

--gas; running water, hot and cold; bath-room, coal-fires, rich carpets,

beautiful pictures on the walls; books on religion, temperance, public

charities and financial schemes; trim colored servants, dainty food

--everything a body could wish for.  And as for stationery, there was no

end to it; the government furnished it; postage stamps were not needed

--the Senator's frank could convey a horse through the mails, if necessary.



And then he saw such dazzling company.  Renowned generals and admirals

who had seemed but colossal myths when he was in the far west, went in

and out before him or sat at the Senator's table, solidified into

palpable flesh and blood; famous statesmen crossed his path daily; that

once rare and awe-inspiring being, a Congressman, was become a common

spectacle--a spectacle so common, indeed, that he could contemplate it

without excitement, even without embarrassment; foreign ministers were

visible to the naked eye at happy intervals; he had looked upon the

President himself, and lived.  And more; this world of enchantment teemed

with speculation--the whole atmosphere was thick with hand that indeed

was Washington Hawkins' native air; none other refreshed his lungs so

gratefully.  He had found paradise at last.



The more he saw of his chief the Senator, the more he honored him, and

the more conspicuously the moral grandeur of his character appeared to

stand out.  To possess the friendship and the kindly interest of such a

man, Washington said in a letter to Louise, was a happy fortune for a

young man whose career had been so impeded and so clouded as his.



The weeks drifted by;--Harry Brierly flirted, danced, added lustre

to the brilliant Senatorial receptions, and diligently "buzzed" and

"button-holed" Congressmen in the interest of the Columbus River scheme;

meantime Senator Dilworthy labored hard in the same interest--and in

others of equal national importance.  Harry wrote frequently to Sellers,

and always encouragingly; and from these letters it was easy to see that

Harry was a pet with all Washington, and was likely to carry the thing

through; that the assistance rendered him by "old Dilworthy" was pretty

fair--pretty fair; "and every little helps, you know," said Harry.



Washington wrote Sellers officially, now and then.  In one of his letters

it appeared that whereas no member of the House committee favored the

scheme at first, there was now needed but one more vote to compass a

majority report.  Closing sentence:



     "Providence seems to further our efforts."

          (Signed,) "ABNER DILWORTHY, U. S. S.,

                         per WASHINGTON HAWKINS, P. S."



At the end of a week, Washington was able to send the happy news,

officially, as usual,--that the needed vote had been added and the bill

favorably reported from the Committee.  Other letters recorded its perils

in Committee of the whole, and by and by its victory, by just the skin of

its teeth, on third reading and final passage.  Then came letters telling

of Mr. Dilworthy's struggles with a stubborn majority in his own

Committee in the Senate; of how these gentlemen succumbed, one by one,

till a majority was secured.



Then there was a hiatus.  Washington watched every move on the board, and

he was in a good position to do this, for he was clerk of this committee,

and also one other.  He received no salary as private secretary, but

these two clerkships, procured by his benefactor, paid him an aggregate

of twelve dollars a day, without counting the twenty percent extra

compensation which would of course be voted to him on the last night of

the session.



He saw the bill go into Committee of the whole and struggle for its life

again, and finally worry through.  In the fullness of time he noted its

second reading, and by and by the day arrived when the grand ordeal came,

and it was put upon its final passage.  Washington listened with bated

breath to the "Aye!" "No!" "No!" "Aye!" of the voters, for a few dread

minutes, and then could bear the suspense no longer.  He ran down from

the gallery and hurried home to wait.



At the end of two or three hours the Senator arrived in the bosom of his

family, and dinner was waiting.  Washington sprang forward, with the

eager question on his lips, and the Senator said:



"We may rejoice freely, now, my son--Providence has crowned our efforts

with success."









CHAPTER XXV.



Washington sent grand good news to Col. Sellers that night.  To Louise he

wrote:



"It is beautiful to hear him talk when his heart is full of thankfulness

for some manifestation of the Divine favor.  You shall know him, some day

my Louise, and knowing him you will honor him, as I do."



Harry wrote:



"I pulled it through, Colonel, but it was a tough job, there is no

question about that.  There was not a friend to the measure in the House

committee when I began, and not a friend in the Senate committee except

old Dil himself, but they were all fixed for a majority report when I

hauled off my forces.  Everybody here says you can't get a thing like

this through Congress without buying committees for straight-out cash on

delivery, but I think I've taught them a thing or two--if I could only

make them believe it.  When I tell the old residenters that this thing

went through without buying a vote or making a promise, they say, 'That's

rather too thin.'  And when I say thin or not thin it's a fact, anyway,

they say, 'Come, now, but do you really believe that?' and when I say I

don't believe anything about it, I know it, they smile and say, 'Well,

you are pretty innocent, or pretty blind, one or the other--there's no

getting around that.'  Why they really do believe that votes have been

bought--they do indeed.  But let them keep on thinking so.  I have found

out that if a man knows how to talk to women, and has a little gift in

the way of argument with men, he can afford to play for an appropriation

against a money bag and give the money bag odds in the game.  We've raked

in $200,000 of Uncle Sam's money, say what they will--and there is more

where this came from, when we want it, and I rather fancy I am the person

that can go in and occupy it, too, if I do say it myself, that shouldn't,

perhaps.  I'll be with you within a week.  Scare up all the men you can,

and put them to work at once.  When I get there I propose to make things

hum."  The great news lifted Sellers into the clouds.  He went to work on

the instant.  He flew hither and thither making contracts, engaging men,

and steeping his soul in the ecstasies of business.  He was the happiest

man in Missouri.  And Louise was the happiest woman; for presently came a

letter from Washington which said:



"Rejoice with me, for the long agony is over!  We have waited patiently

and faithfully, all these years, and now at last the reward is at hand.

A man is to pay our family $40,000 for the Tennessee Land!  It is but a

little sum compared to what we could get by waiting, but I do so long to

see the day when I can call you my own, that I have said to myself,

better take this and enjoy life in a humble way than wear out our best

days in this miserable separation.  Besides, I can put this money into

operations here that will increase it a hundred fold, yes, a thousand

fold, in a few months.  The air is full of such chances, and I know our

family would consent in a moment that I should put in their shares with

mine.  Without a doubt we shall be worth half a million dollars in a year

from this time--I put it at the very lowest figure, because it is always

best to be on the safe side--half a million at the very lowest

calculation, and then your father will give his consent and we can marry

at last.  Oh, that will be a glorious day.  Tell our friends the good

news--I want all to share it."



And she did tell her father and mother, but they said, let it be kept

still for the present.  The careful father also told her to write

Washington and warn him not to speculate with the money, but to wait a

little and advise with one or two wise old heads.  She did this.  And she

managed to keep the good news to herself, though it would seem that the

most careless observer might have seen by her springing step and her

radiant countenance that some fine piece of good fortune had descended

upon her.



Harry joined the Colonel at Stone's Landing, and that dead place sprang

into sudden life.  A swarm of men were hard at work, and the dull air was

filled with the cheery music of labor.  Harry had been constituted

engineer-in-general, and he threw the full strength of his powers into

his work.  He moved among his hirelings like a king.  Authority seemed to

invest him with a new splendor.  Col. Sellers, as general superintendent

of a great public enterprise, was all that a mere human being could be

--and more.  These two grandees went at their imposing "improvement" with

the air of men who had been charged with the work of altering the

foundations of the globe.



They turned their first attention to straightening the river just above

the Landing, where it made a deep bend, and where the maps and plans

showed that the process of straightening would not only shorten distance

but increase the "fall."  They started a cut-off canal across the

peninsula formed by the bend, and such another tearing up of the earth

and slopping around in the mud as followed the order to the men, had

never been seen in that region before.  There was such a panic among the

turtles that at the end of six hours there was not one to be found within

three miles of Stone's Landing.  They took the young and the aged, the

decrepit and the sick upon their backs and left for tide-water in

disorderly procession, the tadpoles following and the bull-frogs bringing

up the rear.



Saturday night came, but the men were obliged to wait, because the

appropriation had not come.  Harry said he had written to hurry up the

money and it would be along presently.  So the work continued, on Monday.

Stone's Landing was making quite a stir in the vicinity, by this time.

Sellers threw a lot or two on the market, "as a feeler," and they sold

well.  He re-clothed his family, laid in a good stock of provisions, and

still had money left.  He started a bank account, in a small way--and

mentioned the deposit casually to friends; and to strangers, too; to

everybody, in fact; but not as a new thing--on the contrary, as a matter

of life-long standing.  He could not keep from buying trifles every day

that were not wholly necessary, it was such a gaudy thing to get out his

bank-book and draw a check, instead of using his old customary formula,

"Charge it" Harry sold a lot or two, also--and had a dinner party or two

at Hawkeye and a general good time with the money.  Both men held on

pretty strenuously for the coming big prices, however.



At the end of a month things were looking bad.  Harry had besieged the

New York headquarters of the Columbus River Slack-water Navigation

Company with demands, then commands, and finally appeals, but to no

purpose; the appropriation did not come; the letters were not even

answered.  The workmen were clamorous, now.  The Colonel and Harry

retired to consult.



"What's to be done?" said the Colonel.



"Hang'd if I know."



"Company say anything?"



"Not a word."



"You telegraphed yesterday?"



Yes, and the day before, too."



"No answer?"



"None-confound them!"



Then there was a long pause.  Finally both spoke at once:



"I've got it!"



"I've got it!"



"What's yours?" said Harry.



"Give the boys thirty-day orders on the Company for the back pay."



"That's it-that's my own idea to a dot.  But then--but then----"



"Yes, I know," said the Colonel; "I know they can't wait for the orders

to go to New York and be cashed, but what's the reason they can't get

them discounted in Hawkeye?"



"Of course they can.  That solves the difficulty.  Everybody knows the

appropriation's been made and the Company's perfectly good."



So the orders were given and the men appeased, though they grumbled a

little at first.  The orders went well enough for groceries and such

things at a fair discount, and the work danced along gaily for a time.

Two or three purchasers put up frame houses at the Landing and moved in,

and of course a far-sighted but easy-going journeyman printer wandered

along and started the "Napoleon Weekly Telegraph and Literary

Repository"--a paper with a Latin motto from the Unabridged dictionary,

and plenty of "fat" conversational tales and double-leaded poetry--all

for two dollars a year, strictly in advance.  Of course the merchants

forwarded the orders at once to New York--and never heard of them again.



At the end of some weeks Harry's orders were a drug in the market--nobody

would take them at any discount whatever.  The second month closed with a

riot.--Sellers was absent at the time, and Harry began an active absence

himself with the mob at his heels.  But being on horseback, he had the

advantage.  He did not tarry in Hawkeye, but went on, thus missing

several appointments with creditors.  He was far on his flight eastward,

and well out of danger when the next morning dawned.  He telegraphed the

Colonel to go down and quiet the laborers--he was bound east for money

--everything would be right in a week--tell the men so--tell them to rely

on him and not be afraid.



Sellers found the mob quiet enough when he reached the Landing.

They had gutted the Navigation office, then piled the beautiful engraved

stock-books and things in the middle of the floor and enjoyed the bonfire

while it lasted.  They had a liking for the Colonel, but still they had

some idea of hanging him, as a sort of make-shift that might answer,

after a fashion, in place of more satisfactory game.



But they made the mistake of waiting to hear what he had to say first.

Within fifteen minutes his tongue had done its work and they were all

rich men.--He gave every one of them a lot in the suburbs of the city of

Stone's Landing, within a mile and a half of the future post office and

railway station, and they promised to resume work as soon as Harry got

east and started the money along.  Now things were blooming and pleasant

again, but the men had no money, and nothing to live on.  The Colonel

divided with them the money he still had in bank--an act which had

nothing surprising about it because he was generally ready to divide

whatever he had with anybody that wanted it, and it was owing to this

very trait that his family spent their days in poverty and at times were

pinched with famine.



When the men's minds had cooled and Sellers was gone, they hated

themselves for letting him beguile them with fine speeches, but it was

too late, now--they agreed to hang him another time--such time as

Providence should appoint.









CHAPTER XXVI.



Rumors of Ruth's frivolity and worldliness at Fallkill traveled to

Philadelphia in due time, and occasioned no little undertalk among the

Bolton relatives.



Hannah Shoecraft told another, cousin that, for her part, she never

believed that Ruth had so much more "mind" than other people; and Cousin

Hulda added that she always thought Ruth was fond of admiration, and that

was the reason she was unwilling to wear plain clothes and attend

Meeting.  The story that Ruth was "engaged" to a young gentleman of

fortune in Fallkill came with the other news, and helped to give point to

the little satirical remarks that went round about Ruth's desire to be a

doctor!



Margaret Bolton was too wise to be either surprised or alarmed by these

rumors.  They might be true; she knew a woman's nature too well to think

them improbable, but she also knew how steadfast Ruth was in her

purposes, and that, as a brook breaks into ripples and eddies and dances

and sports by the way, and yet keeps on to the sea, it was in Ruth's

nature to give back cheerful answer to the solicitations of friendliness

and pleasure, to appear idly delaying even, and sporting in the sunshine,

while the current of her resolution flowed steadily on.



That Ruth had this delight in the mere surface play of life that she

could, for instance, be interested in that somewhat serious by-play

called "flirtation," or take any delight in the exercise of those little

arts of pleasing and winning which are none the less genuine and charming

because they are not intellectual, Ruth, herself, had never suspected

until she went to Fallkill.  She had believed it her duty to subdue her

gaiety of temperament, and let nothing divert her from what are called

serious pursuits: In her limited experience she brought everything to the

judgment of her own conscience, and settled the affairs of all the world

in her own serene judgment hall.  Perhaps her mother saw this, and saw

also that there was nothing in the Friends' society to prevent her from

growing more and more opinionated.



When Ruth returned to Philadelphia, it must be confessed--though it would

not have been by her--that a medical career did seem a little less

necessary for her than formerly; and coming back in a glow of triumph, as

it were, and in the consciousness of the freedom and life in a lively

society and in new and sympathetic friendship, she anticipated pleasure

in an attempt to break up the stiffness and levelness of the society at

home, and infusing into it something of the motion and sparkle which were

so agreeable at Fallkill.  She expected visits from her new friends, she

would have company, the new books and the periodicals about which all the

world was talking, and, in short, she would have life.



For a little while she lived in this atmosphere which she had brought

with her.  Her mother was delighted with this change in her, with the

improvement in her health and the interest she exhibited in home affairs.

Her father enjoyed the society of his favorite daughter as he did few

things besides; he liked her mirthful and teasing ways, and not less a

keen battle over something she had read.  He had been a great reader all

his life, and a remarkable memory had stored his mind with encyclopaedic

information.  It was one of Ruth's delights to cram herself with some out

of the way subject and endeavor to catch her father; but she almost

always failed.  Mr. Bolton liked company, a house full of it, and the

mirth of young people, and he would have willingly entered into any

revolutionary plans Ruth might have suggested in relation to Friends'

society.



But custom and the fixed order are stronger than the most enthusiastic

and rebellious young lady, as Ruth very soon found.  In spite of all her

brave efforts, her frequent correspondence, and her determined animation,

her books and her music, she found herself settling into the clutches of

the old monotony, and as she realized the hopelessness of her endeavors,

the medical scheme took new hold of her, and seemed to her the only

method of escape.



"Mother, thee does not know how different it is in Fallkill, how much

more interesting the people are one meets, how much more life there is."



"But thee will find the world, child, pretty much all the same, when thee

knows it better.  I thought once as thee does now, and had as little

thought of being a Friend as thee has.  Perhaps when thee has seen more,

thee will better appreciate a quiet life."



"Thee married young.  I shall not marry young, and perhaps not at all,"

said Ruth, with a look of vast experience.



"Perhaps thee doesn't know thee own mind; I have known persons of thy

age who did not.  Did thee see anybody whom thee would like to live with

always in Fallkill?"



"Not always," replied Ruth with a little laugh.  "Mother, I think I

wouldn't say 'always' to any one until I have a profession and am as

independent as he is.  Then my love would be a free act, and not in any

way a necessity."



Margaret Bolton smiled at this new-fangled philosophy.  "Thee will find

that love, Ruth, is a thing thee won't reason about, when it comes, nor

make any bargains about.  Thee wrote that Philip Sterling was at

Fallkill."



"Yes, and Henry Brierly, a friend of his; a very amusing young fellow and

not so serious-minded as Philip, but a bit of a fop maybe."



"And thee preferred the fop to the serious-minded?"



"I didn't prefer anybody; but Henry Brierly was good company, which

Philip wasn't always."



"Did thee know thee father had been in correspondence with Philip?"



Ruth looked up surprised and with a plain question in her eyes.



"Oh, it's not about thee."



"What then?" and if there was any shade of disappointment in her tone,

probably Ruth herself did not know it.



"It's about some land up in the country.  That man Bigler has got father

into another speculation."



"That odious man!  Why will father have anything to do with him?  Is it

that railroad?"



"Yes.  Father advanced money and took land as security, and whatever has

gone with the money and the bonds, he has on his hands a large tract of

wild land."



"And what has Philip to do with that?"



"It has good timber, if it could ever be got out, and father says that

there must be coal in it; it's in a coal region.  He wants Philip to

survey it, and examine it for indications of coal."



"It's another of father's fortunes, I suppose," said Ruth.  "He has put

away so many fortunes for us that I'm afraid we never shall find them."



Ruth was interested in it nevertheless, and perhaps mainly because Philip

was to be connected with the enterprise.  Mr. Bigler came to dinner with

her father next day, and talked a great deal about Mr. Bolton's

magnificent tract of land, extolled the sagacity that led him to secure

such a property, and led the talk along to another railroad which would

open a northern communication to this very land.



"Pennybacker says it's full of coal, he's no doubt of it, and a railroad

to strike the Erie would make it a fortune."



"Suppose you take the land and work the thing up, Mr. Bigler; you may

have the tract for three dollars an acre."



"You'd throw it away, then," replied Mr. Bigler, "and I'm not the man to

take advantage of a friend.  But if you'll put a mortgage on it for the

northern road, I wouldn't mind taking an interest, if Pennybacker is

willing; but Pennybacker, you know, don't go much on land, he sticks to

the legislature."  And Mr. Bigler laughed.



When Mr. Bigler had gone, Ruth asked her father about Philip's connection

with the land scheme.



"There's nothing definite," said Mr. Bolton.  "Philip is showing aptitude

for his profession.  I hear the best reports of him in New York, though

those sharpers don't 'intend to do anything but use him.  I've written

and offered him employment in surveying and examining the land.  We want

to know what it is.  And if there is anything in it that his enterprise

can dig out, he shall have an interest.  I should be glad to give the

young fellow a lift."



All his life Eli Bolton had been giving young fellows a lift, and

shouldering the loses when things turned out unfortunately.  His ledger,

take-it-altogether, would not show a balance on the right side; but

perhaps the losses on his books will turn out to be credits in a world

where accounts are kept on a different basis.  The left hand of the

ledger will appear the right, looked at from the other side.



Philip, wrote to Ruth rather a comical account of the bursting up of the

city of Napoleon and the navigation improvement scheme, of Harry's flight

and the Colonel's discomfiture.  Harry left in such a hurry that he

hadn't even time to bid Miss Laura Hawkins good-bye, but he had no doubt

that Harry would console himself with the next pretty face he saw

--a remark which was thrown in for Ruth's benefit.  Col. Sellers had in all

probability, by this time, some other equally brilliant speculation in

his brain.



As to the railroad, Philip had made up his mind that it was merely kept

on foot for speculative purposes in Wall street, and he was about to quit

it.  Would Ruth be glad to hear, he wondered, that he was coming East?

For he was coming, in spite of a letter from Harry in New York, advising

him to hold on until he had made some arrangements in regard to

contracts, he to be a little careful about Sellers, who was somewhat

visionary, Harry said.



The summer went on without much excitement for Ruth.  She kept up a

correspondence with Alice, who promised a visit in the fall, she read,

she earnestly tried to interest herself in home affairs and such people

as came to the house; but she found herself falling more and more into

reveries, and growing weary of things as they were.  She felt that

everybody might become in time like two relatives from a Shaker

establishment in Ohio, who visited the Boltons about this time, a father

and son, clad exactly alike, and alike in manners.  The son; however,

who was not of age, was more unworldly and sanctimonious than his father;

he always addressed his parent as "Brother Plum," and bore himself,

altogether in such a superior manner that Ruth longed to put bent pins in

his chair.  Both father and son wore the long, single breasted collarless

coats of their society, without buttons, before or behind, but with a row

of hooks and eyes on either side in front.  It was Ruth's suggestion that

the coats would be improved by a single hook and eye sewed on in the

small of the back where the buttons usually are.



Amusing as this Shaker caricature of the Friends was, it oppressed Ruth

beyond measure; and increased her feeling of being stifled.



It was a most unreasonable feeling.  No home could be pleasanter than

Ruth's.  The house, a little out of the city; was one of those elegant

country residences which so much charm visitors to the suburbs of

Philadelphia.  A modern dwelling and luxurious in everything that wealth

could suggest for comfort, it stood in the midst of exquisitely kept

lawns, with groups of trees, parterres of flowers massed in colors, with

greenhouse, grapery and garden; and on one side, the garden sloped away

in undulations to a shallow brook that ran over a pebbly bottom and sang

under forest trees.  The country about teas the perfection of cultivated

landscape, dotted with cottages, and stately mansions of Revolutionary

date, and sweet as an English country-side, whether seen in the soft

bloom of May or in the mellow ripeness of late October.



It needed only the peace of the mind within, to make it a paradise.

One riding by on the Old Germantown road, and seeing a young girl

swinging in the hammock on the piazza and, intent upon some volume of old

poetry or the latest novel, would no doubt have envied a life so idyllic.

He could not have imagined that the young girl was reading a volume of

reports of clinics and longing to be elsewhere.



Ruth could not have been more discontented if all the wealth about her

had been as unsubstantial as a dream.  Perhaps she so thought it.



"I feel," she once said to her father, "as if I were living in a house of

cards."



"And thee would like to turn it into a hospital?"



"No.  But tell me father," continued Ruth, not to be put off, "is thee

still going on with that Bigler and those other men who come here and

entice thee?"



Mr. Bolton smiled, as men do when they talk with women about "business"

"Such men have their uses, Ruth.  They keep the world active, and I owe a

great many of my best operations to such men.  Who knows, Ruth, but this

new land purchase, which I confess I yielded a little too much to Bigler

in, may not turn out a fortune for thee and the rest of the children?"



"Ah, father, thee sees every thing in a rose-colored light.  I do believe

thee wouldn't have so readily allowed me to begin the study of medicine,

if it hadn't had the novelty of an experiment to thee."



"And is thee satisfied with it?"



"If thee means, if I have had enough of it, no.  I just begin to see what

I can do in it, and what a noble profession it is for a woman.  Would

thee have me sit here like a bird on a bough and wait for somebody to

come and put me in a cage?"



Mr. Bolton was not sorry to divert the talk from his own affairs, and he

did not think it worth while to tell his family of a performance that

very day which was entirely characteristic of him.



Ruth might well say that she felt as if she were living in a house of

cards, although the Bolton household had no idea of the number of perils

that hovered over them, any more than thousands of families in America

have of the business risks and contingences upon which their prosperity

and luxury hang.



A sudden call upon Mr. Bolton for a large sum of money, which must be

forthcoming at once, had found him in the midst of a dozen ventures, from

no one of which a dollar could be realized.  It was in vain that he

applied to his business acquaintances and friends; it was a period of

sudden panic and no money.  "A hundred thousand!  Mr. Bolton," said

Plumly.  "Good God, if you should ask me for ten, I shouldn't know where

to get it."



And yet that day Mr. Small (Pennybacker, Bigler and Small) came to Mr.

Bolton with a piteous story of ruin in a coal operation, if he could not

raise ten thousand dollars.  Only ten, and he was sure of a fortune.

Without it he was a beggar.  Mr. Bolton had already Small's notes for a

large amount in his safe, labeled "doubtful;" he had helped him again and

again, and always with the same result.  But Mr. Small spoke with a

faltering voice of his family, his daughter in school, his wife ignorant

of his calamity, and drew such a picture of their agony, that Mr. Bolton

put by his own more pressing necessity, and devoted the day to scraping

together, here and there, ten thousand dollars for this brazen beggar,

who had never kept a promise to him nor paid a debt.



Beautiful credit!  The foundation of modern society.  Who shall say that

this is not the golden age of mutual trust, of unlimited reliance upon

human promises?  That is a peculiar condition of society which enables a

whole nation to instantly recognize point and meaning in the familiar

newspaper anecdote, which puts into the mouth of a distinguished

speculator in lands and mines this remark:--"I wasn't worth a cent two

years ago, and now I owe two millions of dollars."









CHAPTER XXVII.



It was a hard blow to poor Sellers to see the work on his darling

enterprise stop, and the noise and bustle and confusion that had been

such refreshment to his soul, sicken and die out.  It was hard to come

down to humdrum ordinary life again after being a General Superintendent

and the most conspicuous man in the community.  It was sad to see his

name disappear from the newspapers; sadder still to see it resurrected at

intervals, shorn of its aforetime gaudy gear of compliments and clothed

on with rhetorical tar and feathers.



But his friends suffered more on his account than he did.  He was a cork

that could not be kept under the water many moments at a time.



He had to bolster up his wife's spirits every now and then.  On one of

these occasions he said:



"It's all right, my dear, all right; it will all come right in a little

while.  There's $200,000 coming, and that will set things booming again:

Harry seems to be having some difficulty, but that's to be expected--you

can't move these big operations to the tune of Fisher's Hornpipe, you

know.  But Harry will get it started along presently, and then you'll

see!  I expect the news every day now."



"But Beriah, you've been expecting it every day, all along, haven't you?"



"Well, yes; yes--I don't know but I have.  But anyway, the longer it's

delayed, the nearer it grows to the time when it will start--same as

every day you live brings you nearer to--nearer--"



"The grave?"



"Well, no--not that exactly; but you can't understand these things, Polly

dear--women haven't much head for business, you know.  You make yourself

perfectly comfortable, old lady, and you'll see how we'll trot this right

along.  Why bless you, let the appropriation lag, if it wants to--that's

no great matter--there's a bigger thing than that."



"Bigger than $200,000, Beriah?"



"Bigger, child?--why, what's $200,000?  Pocket money!  Mere pocket money!

Look at the railroad!  Did you forget the railroad?  It ain't many months

till spring; it will be coming right along, and the railroad swimming

right along behind it.  Where'll it be by the middle of summer?  Just

stop and fancy a moment--just think a little--don't anything suggest

itself?  Bless your heart, you dear women live right in the present all

the time--but a man, why a man lives----



"In the future, Beriah?  But don't we live in the future most too much,

Beriah?  We do somehow seem to manage to live on next year's crop of corn

and potatoes as a general thing while this year is still dragging along,

but sometimes it's not a robust diet,--Beriah.  But don't look that way,

dear--don't mind what I say.  I don't mean to fret, I don't mean to

worry; and I don't, once a month, do I, dear?  But when I get a little

low and feel bad, I get a bit troubled and worrisome, but it don't mean

anything in the world.  It passes right away.  I know you're doing all

you can, and I don't want to seem repining and ungrateful--for I'm not,

Beriah--you know I'm not, don't you?"



"Lord bless you, child, I know you are the very best little woman that

ever lived--that ever lived on the whole face of the Earth!  And I know

that I would be a dog not to work for you and think for you and scheme

for you with all my might.  And I'll bring things all right yet, honey

--cheer up and don't you fear.  The railroad----"



"Oh, I had forgotten the railroad, dear, but when a body gets blue, a

body forgets everything.  Yes, the railroad--tell me about the railroad."



"Aha, my girl, don't you see?  Things ain't so dark, are they?  Now I

didn't forget the railroad.  Now just think for a moment--just figure up

a little on the future dead moral certainties.  For instance, call this

waiter St. Louis.



"And we'll lay this fork (representing the railroad) from St. Louis to

this potato, which is Slouchburg:



"Then with this carving knife we'll continue the railroad from Slouchburg

to Doodleville, shown by the black pepper:



"Then we run along the--yes--the comb--to the tumbler that's Brimstone:



"Thence by the pipe to Belshazzar, which is the salt-cellar:



"Thence to, to--that quill--Catfish--hand me the pincushion, Marie

Antoinette:



"Thence right along these shears to this horse, Babylon:



"Then by the spoon to Bloody Run--thank you, the ink:



"Thence to Hail Columbia--snuffers, Polly, please move that cup and

saucer close up, that's Hail Columbia:



"Then--let me open my knife--to Hark-from-the-Tomb, where we'll put

the candle-stick--only a little distance from Hail Columbia to

Hark-from-the-Tomb--down-grade all the way.



"And there we strike Columbus River--pass me two or throe skeins of

thread to stand for the river; the sugar bowl will do for Hawkeye, and

the rat trap for Stone's Landing-Napoleon, I mean--and you can see how

much better Napoleon is located than Hawkeye.  Now here you are with your

railroad complete, and showing its continuation to Hallelujah and thence

to Corruptionville.



"Now then-them you are!  It's a beautiful road, beautiful.  Jeff Thompson

can out-engineer any civil engineer that ever sighted through an aneroid,

or a theodolite, or whatever they call it--he calls it sometimes one and

sometimes the other just whichever levels off his sentence neatest, I

reckon.  But ain't it a ripping toad, though?  I tell you, it'll make a

stir when it gets along.  Just see what a country it goes through.

There's your onions at Slouchburg--noblest onion country that graces

God's footstool; and there's your turnip country all around Doodleville

--bless my life, what fortunes are going to be made there when they get

that contrivance perfected for extracting olive oil out of turnips--if

there's any in them; and I reckon there is, because Congress has made an

appropriation of money to test the thing, and they wouldn't have done

that just on conjecture, of course.  And now we come to the Brimstone

region--cattle raised there till you can't rest--and corn, and all that

sort of thing.  Then you've got a little stretch along through Belshazzar

that don't produce anything now--at least nothing but rocks--but

irrigation will fetch it.  Then from Catfish to Babylon it's a little

swampy, but there's dead loads of peat down under there somewhere.  Next

is the Bloody Run and Hail Columbia country--tobacco enough can be raised

there to support two such railroads.  Next is the sassparilla region.

I reckon there's enough of that truck along in there on the line of the

pocket-knife, from Hail Columbia to Hark-from-the Tomb to fat up all the

consumptives in all the hospitals from Halifax to the Holy Land.  It just

grows like weeds!  I've got a little belt of sassparilla land in there

just tucked away unobstrusively waiting for my little Universal

Expectorant to get into shape in my head.  And I'll fix that, you know.

One of these days I'll have all the nations of the earth expecto--"



"But Beriah, dear--"



"Don't interrupt me; Polly--I don't want you to lose the run of the map

--well, take your toy-horse, James Fitz-James, if you must have it--and run

along with you.  Here, now--the soap will do for Babylon.  Let me see

--where was I?  Oh yes--now we run down to Stone's Lan--Napoleon--now we

run down to Napoleon.  Beautiful road.  Look at that, now.  Perfectly

straight line-straight as the way to the grave.  And see where it leaves

Hawkeye-clear out in the cold, my dear, clear out in the cold.  That

town's as bound to die as--well if I owned it I'd get its obituary ready,

now, and notify the mourners.  Polly, mark my words--in three years from

this, Hawkeye'll be a howling wilderness.  You'll see.  And just look at

that river--noblest stream that meanders over the thirsty earth!

--calmest, gentlest artery that refreshes her weary bosom!  Railroad

goes all over it and all through it--wades right along on stilts.

Seventeen bridges in three miles and a half--forty-nine bridges from

Hark-from-the-Tomb to Stone's Landing altogether--forty nine bridges, and

culverts enough to culvert creation itself!  Hadn't skeins of thread

enough to represent them all--but you get an idea--perfect trestle-work

of bridges for seventy two miles: Jeff Thompson and I fixed all that, you

know; he's to get the contracts and I'm to put them through on the

divide.  Just oceans of money in those bridges.  It's the only part of

the railroad I'm interested in,--down along the line--and it's all I

want, too.  It's enough, I should judge. Now here we are at Napoleon.

Good enough country plenty good enough--all it wants is population.

That's all right--that will come.  And it's no bad country now for

calmness and solitude, I can tell you--though there's no money in that,

of course.  No money, but a man wants rest, a man wants peace--a man

don't want to rip and tear around all the time.  And here we go, now,

just as straight as a string for Hallelujah--it's a beautiful angle

--handsome up grade all the way --and then away you go to Corruptionville,

the gaudiest country for early carrots and cauliflowers that ever--good

missionary field, too.  There ain't such another missionary field outside

the jungles of Central Africa.  And patriotic?--why they named it after

Congress itself.  Oh, I warn you, my dear, there's a good time coming,

and it'll be right along before you know what you're about, too.  That

railroad's fetching it. You see what it is as far as I've got, and if I

had enough bottles and soap and boot-jacks and such things to carry it

along to where it joins onto the Union Pacific, fourteen hundred miles

from here, I should exhibit to you in that little internal improvement a

spectacle of inconceivable sublimity.  So, don't you see?  We've got the

rail road to fall back on; and in the meantime, what are we worrying

about that $200,000 appropriation for?  That's all right.  I'd be willing

to bet anything that the very next letter that comes from Harry will--"



The eldest boy entered just in the nick of time and brought a letter,

warm from the post-office.



"Things do look bright, after all, Beriah.  I'm sorry I was blue, but it

did seem as if everything had been going against us for whole ages.  Open

the letter--open it quick, and let's know all about it before we stir out

of our places.  I am all in a fidget to know what it says."



The letter was opened, without any unnecessary delay.









CHAPTER XXVIII.



Whatever may have been the language of Harry's letter to the Colonel,

the information it conveyed was condensed or expanded, one or the other,

from the following episode of his visit to New York:



He called, with official importance in his mien, at No.-- Wall street,

where a great gilt sign betokened the presence of the head-quarters of

the "Columbus River Slack-Water Navigation Company."  He entered and

gave a dressy porter his card, and was requested to wait a moment in a

sort of ante-room.  The porter returned in a minute; and asked whom he

would like to see?



"The president of the company, of course."



"He is busy with some gentlemen, sir; says he will be done with them

directly."



That a copper-plate card with "Engineer-in-Chief" on it should be

received with such tranquility as this, annoyed Mr. Brierly not a little.

But he had to submit.  Indeed his annoyance had time to augment a good

deal; for he was allowed to cool his heels a frill half hour in the

ante-room before those gentlemen emerged and he was ushered into the

presence. He found a stately dignitary occupying a very official chair

behind a long green morocco-covered table, in a room with sumptuously

carpeted and furnished, and well garnished with pictures.



"Good morning, sir; take a seat--take a seat."



"Thank you sir," said Harry, throwing as much chill into his manner as

his ruffled dignity prompted.



"We perceive by your reports and the reports of the Chief Superintendent,

that you have been making gratifying progress with the work.--We are all

very much pleased."



"Indeed?  We did not discover it from your letters--which we have not

received; nor by the treatment our drafts have met with--which were not

honored; nor by the reception of any part of the appropriation, no part

of it having come to hand."



"Why, my dear Mr. Brierly, there must be some mistake, I am sure we wrote

you and also Mr. Sellers, recently--when my clerk comes he will show

copies--letters informing you of the ten per cent. assessment."



"Oh, certainly, we got those letters.  But what we wanted was money to

carry on the work--money to pay the men."



"Certainly, certainly--true enough--but we credited you both for a large

part of your assessments--I am sure that was in our letters."



"Of course that was in--I remember that."



"Ah, very well then.  Now we begin to understand each other."



"Well, I don't see that we do.  There's two months' wages due the men,

and----"



"How?  Haven't you paid the men?"



"Paid them!  How are we going to pay them when you don't honor our

drafts?"



"Why, my dear sir, I cannot see how you can find any fault with us.  I am

sure we have acted in a perfectly straight forward business way.--Now let

us look at the thing a moment.  You subscribed for 100 shares of the

capital stock, at $1,000 a share, I believe?"



"Yes, sir, I did."



"And Mr. Sellers took a like amount?"



"Yes, sir."



"Very well.  No concern can get along without money.  We levied a ten per

cent. assessment.  It was the original understanding that you and Mr.

Sellers were to have the positions you now hold, with salaries of $600 a

month each, while in active service.  You were duly elected to these

places, and you accepted them.  Am I right?"



"Certainly."



"Very well.  You were given your instructions and put to work.  By your

reports it appears that you have expended the sum of $9,610 upon the said

work.  Two months salary to you two officers amounts altogether to

$2,400--about one-eighth of your ten per cent. assessment, you see; which

leaves you in debt to the company for the other seven-eighths of the

assessment--viz, something over $8,000 apiece.  Now instead of requiring

you to forward this aggregate of $16,000 or $17,000 to New York, the

company voted unanimously to let you pay it over to the contractors,

laborers from time to time, and give you credit on the books for it.

And they did it without a murmur, too, for they were pleased with the

progress you had made, and were glad to pay you that little compliment

--and a very neat one it was, too, I am sure.  The work you did fell short

of $10,000, a trifle.  Let me see--$9,640 from $20,000 salary $2;400

added--ah yes, the balance due the company from yourself and Mr. Sellers

is $7,960, which I will take the responsibility of allowing to stand for

the present, unless you prefer to draw a check now, and thus----"



"Confound it, do you mean to say that instead of the company owing us

$2,400, we owe the company $7,960?"



"Well, yes."



"And that we owe the men and the contractors nearly ten thousand dollars

besides?"



"Owe them!  Oh bless my soul, you can't mean that you have not paid these

people?"



"But I do mean it!"



The president rose and walked the floor like a man in bodily pain.  His

brows contracted, he put his hand up and clasped his forehead, and kept

saying, "Oh, it is, too bad, too bad, too bad!  Oh, it is bound to be

found out--nothing can prevent it--nothing!"



Then he threw himself into his chair and said:



"My dear Mr. Brierson, this is dreadful--perfectly dreadful.  It will be

found out.  It is bound to tarnish the good name of the company; our

credit will be seriously, most seriously impaired.  How could you be so

thoughtless--the men ought to have been paid though it beggared us all!"



"They ought, ought they?  Then why the devil--my name is not Bryerson, by

the way--why the mischief didn't the compa--why what in the nation ever

became of the appropriation?  Where is that appropriation?--if a

stockholder may make so bold as to ask."



The appropriation?--that paltry $200,000, do you mean?"



"Of course--but I didn't know that $200,000 was so very paltry.  Though I

grant, of course, that it is not a large sum, strictly speaking.  But

where is it?"



"My dear sir, you surprise me.  You surely cannot have had a large

acquaintance with this sort of thing.  Otherwise you would not have

expected much of a result from a mere INITIAL appropriation like that.

It was never intended for anything but a mere nest egg for the future and

real appropriations to cluster around."



"Indeed?  Well, was it a myth, or was it a reality?  Whatever become of

it?"



"Why the--matter is simple enough.  A Congressional appropriation costs

money.  Just reflect, for instance--a majority of the House Committee,

say $10,000 apiece--$40,000; a majority of the Senate Committee, the same

each--say $40,000; a little extra to one or two chairman of one or two

such committees, say $10,000 each--$20,000; and there's $100,000 of the

money gone, to begin with.  Then, seven male lobbyists, at $3,000 each

--$21,000; one female lobbyist, $10,000; a high moral Congressman or

Senator here and there--the high moral ones cost more, because they.

give tone to a measure--say ten of these at $3,000 each, is $30,000; then

a lot of small-fry country members who won't vote for anything whatever

without pay--say twenty at $500 apiece, is $10,000; a lot of dinners to

members--say $10,000 altogether; lot of jimcracks for Congressmen's wives

and children--those go a long way--you can't sped too much money in that

line--well, those things cost in a lump, say $10,000--along there

somewhere; and then comes your printed documents--your maps, your tinted

engravings, your pamphlets, your illuminated show cards, your

advertisements in a hundred and fifty papers at ever so much a line

--because you've got to keep the papers all light or you are gone up, you

know.  Oh, my dear sir, printing bills are destruction itself.  Ours so

far amount to--let me see--10; 52; 22; 13;--and then there's 11; 14; 33

--well, never mind the details, the total in clean numbers foots up

$118,254.42 thus far!"



"What!"



"Oh, yes indeed.  Printing's no bagatelle, I can tell you.  And then

there's your contributions, as a company, to Chicago fires and Boston

fires, and orphan asylums and all that sort of thing--head the list, you

see, with the company's full name and a thousand dollars set opposite

--great card, sir--one of the finest advertisements in the world--the

preachers mention it in the pulpit when it's a religious charity--one of

the happiest advertisements in the world is your benevolent donation.

Ours have amounted to sixteen thousand dollars and some cents up to this

time."



"Good heavens!"



"Oh, yes.  Perhaps the biggest thing we've done in the advertising line

was to get an officer of the U. S. government, of perfectly Himmalayan

official altitude, to write up our little internal improvement for a

religious paper of enormous circulation--I tell you that makes our bonds

go handsomely among the pious poor.  Your religious paper is by far the

best vehicle for a thing of this kind, because they'll 'lead' your

article and put it right in the midst of the reading matter; and if it's

got a few Scripture quotations in it, and some temperance platitudes and

a bit of gush here and there about Sunday Schools, and a sentimental

snuffle now and then about 'God's precious ones, the honest hard-handed

poor,' it works the nation like a charm, my dear sir, and never a man

suspects that it is an advertisement; but your secular paper sticks you

right into the advertising columns and of course you don't take a trick.

Give me a religious paper to advertise in, every time; and if you'll just

look at their advertising pages, you'll observe that other people think a

good deal as I do--especially people who have got little financial

schemes to make everybody rich with.  Of course I mean your great big

metropolitan religious papers that know how to serve God and make money

at the same time--that's your sort, sir, that's your sort--a religious

paper that isn't run to make money is no use to us, sir, as an

advertising medium--no use to anybody--in our line of business.  I guess

our next best dodge was sending a pleasure trip of newspaper reporters

out to Napoleon.  Never paid them a cent; just filled them up with

champagne and the fat of the land, put pen, ink and paper before them

while they were red-hot, and bless your soul when you come to read their

letters you'd have supposed they'd been to heaven.  And if a sentimental

squeamishness held one or two of them back from taking a less rosy view

of Napoleon, our hospitalities tied his tongue, at least, and he said

nothing at all and so did us no harm.  Let me see--have I stated all the

expenses I've been at?  No, I was near forgetting one or two items.

There's your official salaries--you can't get good men for nothing.

Salaries cost pretty lively.  And then there's your big high-sounding

millionaire names stuck into your advertisements as stockholders--another

card, that--and they are stockholders, too, but you have to give them the

stock and non-assessable at that--so they're an expensive lot.  Very,

very expensive thing, take it all around, is a big internal improvement

concern--but you see that yourself, Mr. Bryerman--you see that, yourself,

sir."



"But look here.  I think you are a little mistaken about it's ever having

cost anything for Congressional votes.  I happen to know something about

that.  I've let you say your say--now let me say mine.  I don't wish to

seem to throw any suspicion on anybody's statements, because we are all

liable to be mistaken.  But how would it strike you if I were to say that

I was in Washington all the time this bill was pending? and what if I

added that I put the measure through myself?  Yes, sir, I did that little

thing.  And moreover, I never paid a dollar for any man's vote and never

promised one.  There are some ways of doing a thing that are as good as

others which other people don't happen to think about, or don't have the

knack of succeeding in, if they do happen to think of them.  My dear sir,

I am obliged to knock some of your expenses in the head--for never a cent

was paid a Congressman or Senator on the part of this Navigation Company."



The president smiled blandly, even sweetly, all through this harangue,

and then said:



"Is that so?"



"Every word of it."



"Well it does seem to alter the complexion of things a little.  You are

acquainted with the members down there, of course, else you could not

have worked to such advantage?"



"I know them all, sir.  I know their wives, their children, their babies

--I even made it a point to be on good terms with their lackeys.  I know

every Congressman well--even familiarly."



"Very good.  Do you know any of their signatures?  Do you know their

handwriting?"



"Why I know their handwriting as well as I know my own--have had

correspondence enough with them, I should think.  And their signatures

--why I can tell their initials, even."



The president went to a private safe, unlocked it and got out some

letters and certain slips of paper.  Then he said:



"Now here, for instance; do you believe that that is a genuine letter?

Do you know this signature here?--and this one?  Do you know who those

initials represent--and are they forgeries?"



Harry was stupefied.  There were things there that made his brain swim.

Presently, at the bottom of one of the letters he saw a signature that

restored his equilibrium; it even brought the sunshine of a smile to his

face.



The president said:



"That one amuses you.  You never suspected him?"



"Of course I ought to have suspected him, but I don't believe it ever

really occurred to me.  Well, well, well--how did you ever have the nerve

to approach him, of all others?"



"Why my friend, we never think of accomplishing anything without his

help.  He is our mainstay.  But how do those letters strike you?"



"They strike me dumb!  What a stone-blind idiot I have been!"



"Well, take it all around, I suppose you had a pleasant time in

Washington," said the president, gathering up the letters; "of course you

must have had.  Very few men could go there and get a money bill through

without buying a single"



"Come, now, Mr. President, that's plenty of that!  I take back everything

I said on that head.  I'm a wiser man to-day than I was yesterday, I can

tell you."



"I think you are.  In fact I am satisfied you are.  But now I showed you

these things in confidence, you understand.  Mention facts as much as you

want to, but don't mention names to anybody.  I can depend on you for

that, can't I?"



"Oh, of course.  I understand the necessity of that.  I will not betray

the names.  But to go back a bit, it begins to look as if you never saw

any of that appropriation at all?"



"We saw nearly ten thousand dollars of it--and that was all.  Several of

us took turns at log-rolling in Washington, and if we had charged

anything for that service, none of that $10,000 would ever have reached

New York."



"If you hadn't levied the assessment you would have been in a close place

I judge?"



"Close?  Have you figured up the total of the disbursements I told you

of?"



"No, I didn't think of that."



"Well, lets see:



Spent in Washington, say, ........... $191,000

Printing, advertising, etc., say .... $118,000

Charity, say, .......................  $16,000



               Total, ............... $325,000



The money to do that with, comes from

--Appropriation, ...................... $200,000



Ten per cent. assessment on capital of

     $1,000,000 ..................... $100,000



               Total, ............... $300,000



"Which leaves us in debt some $25,000 at this moment.  Salaries of home

officers are still going on; also printing and advertising.  Next month

will show a state of things!"



"And then--burst up, I suppose?"



"By no means.  Levy another assessment"



"Oh, I see.  That's dismal."



"By no means."



"Why isn't it?  What's the road out?"



"Another appropriation, don't you see?"



"Bother the appropriations.  They cost more than they come to."



"Not the next one.  We'll call for half a million--get it and go for a

million the very next month."--"Yes, but the cost of it!"



The president smiled, and patted his secret letters affectionately.  He

said:



"All these people are in the next Congress.  We shan't have to pay them a

cent.  And what is more, they will work like beavers for us--perhaps it

might be to their advantage."



Harry reflected profoundly a while.  Then he said:



"We send many missionaries to lift up the benighted races of other lands.

How much cheaper and better it would be if those people could only come

here and drink of our civilization at its fountain head."



"I perfectly agree with you, Mr. Beverly.  Must you go?  Well, good

morning.  Look in, when you are passing; and whenever I can give you any

information about our affairs and pro'spects, I shall be glad to do it."



Harry's letter was not a long one, but it contained at least the

calamitous figures that came out in the above conversation.  The Colonel

found himself in a rather uncomfortable place--no $1,200 salary

forthcoming; and himself held responsible for half of the $9,640 due the

workmen, to say nothing of being in debt to the company to the extent of

nearly $4,000.  Polly's heart was nearly broken; the "blues" returned in

fearful force, and she had to go out of the room to hide the tears that

nothing could keep back now.



There was mourning in another quarter, too, for Louise had a letter.

Washington had refused, at the last moment, to take $40,000 for the

Tennessee Land, and had demanded $150,000!  So the trade fell through,

and now Washington was wailing because he had been so foolish.  But he

wrote that his man might probably return to the city soon, and then he

meant to sell to him, sure, even if he had to take $10,000.  Louise had a

good cry-several of them, indeed--and the family charitably forebore to

make any comments that would increase her grief.



Spring blossomed, summer came, dragged its hot weeks by, and the

Colonel's spirits rose, day by day, for the railroad was making good

progress.  But by and by something happened.  Hawkeye had always declined

to subscribe anything toward the railway, imagining that her large

business would be a sufficient compulsory influence; but now Hawkeye was

frightened; and before Col. Sellers knew what he was about, Hawkeye, in a

panic, had rushed to the front and subscribed such a sum that Napoleon's

attractions suddenly sank into insignificance and the railroad concluded

to follow a comparatively straight coarse instead of going miles out of

its way to build up a metropolis in the muddy desert of Stone's Landing.



The thunderbolt fell.  After all the Colonel's deep planning; after all

his brain work and tongue work in drawing public attention to his pet

project and enlisting interest in it; after all his faithful hard toil

with his hands, and running hither and thither on his busy feet; after

all his high hopes and splendid prophecies, the fates had turned their

backs on him at last, and all in a moment his air-castles crumbled to

ruins abort him.  Hawkeye rose from her fright triumphant and rejoicing,

and down went Stone's Landing!  One by one its meagre parcel of

inhabitants packed up and moved away, as the summer waned and fall

approached.  Town lots were no longer salable, traffic ceased, a deadly

lethargy fell upon the place once more, the "Weekly Telegraph" faded into

an early grave, the wary tadpole returned from exile, the bullfrog

resumed his ancient song, the tranquil turtle sunned his back upon bank

and log and drowsed his grateful life away as in the old sweet days of

yore.









CHAPTER XXIX.



Philip Sterling was on his way to Ilium, in the state of Pennsylvania.

Ilium was the railway station nearest to the tract of wild land which

Mr. Bolton had commissioned him to examine.



On the last day of the journey as the railway train Philip was on was

leaving a large city, a lady timidly entered the drawing-room car, and

hesitatingly took a chair that was at the moment unoccupied.  Philip saw

from the window that a gentleman had put her upon the car just as it was

starting.  In a few moments the conductor entered, and without waiting an

explanation, said roughly to the lady,



"Now you can't sit there.  That seat's taken.  Go into the other car."



"I did not intend to take the seat," said the lady rising, "I only sat

down a moment till the conductor should come and give me a seat."



"There aint any.  Car's full.  You'll have to leave."



"But, sir," said the lady, appealingly, "I thought--"



"Can't help what you thought--you must go into the other car."



"The train is going very fast, let me stand here till we stop."



"The lady can have my seat," cried Philip, springing up.



The conductor turned towards Philip, and coolly and deliberately surveyed

him from head to foot, with contempt in every line of his face, turned

his back upon him without a word, and said to the lady,



"Come, I've got no time to talk.  You must go now."



The lady, entirely disconcerted by such rudeness, and frightened, moved

towards the door, opened it and stepped out.  The train was swinging

along at a rapid rate, jarring from side to side; the step was a long one

between the cars and there was no protecting grating.  The lady attempted

it, but lost her balance, in the wind and the motion of the car, and

fell!  She would inevitably have gone down under the wheels, if Philip,

who had swiftly followed her, had not caught her arm and drawn her up.

He then assisted her across, found her a seat, received her bewildered

thanks, and returned to his car.



The conductor was still there, taking his tickets, and growling something

about imposition.  Philip marched up to him, and burst out with,



"You are a brute, an infernal brute, to treat a woman that way."



"Perhaps you'd like to make a fuss about it," sneered the conductor.



Philip's reply was a blow, given so suddenly and planted so squarely in

the conductor's face, that it sent him reeling over a fat passenger, who

was looking up in mild wonder that any one should dare to dispute with a

conductor, and against the side of the car.



He recovered himself, reached the bell rope, "Damn you, I'll learn you,"

stepped to the door and called a couple of brakemen, and then, as the

speed slackened; roared out,



"Get off this train."



"I shall not get off.  I have as much right here as you."



"We'll see," said the conductor, advancing with the brakemen.  The

passengers protested, and some of them said to each other, "That's too

bad," as they always do in such cases, but none of them offered to take a

hand with Philip.  The men seized him, wrenched him from his seat,

dragged him along the aisle, tearing his clothes, thrust him from the

car, and, then flung his carpet-bag, overcoat and umbrella after him.

And the train went on.



The conductor, red in the face and puffing from his exertion, swaggered

through the car, muttering "Puppy, I'll learn him."  The passengers, when

he had gone, were loud in their indignation, and talked about signing a

protest, but they did nothing more than talk.



The next morning the Hooverville Patriot and Clarion had this "item":--



                          SLIGHTUALLY OVERBOARD.



     "We learn that as the down noon express was leaving H---- yesterday

     a lady! (God save the mark) attempted to force herself into the

     already full palatial car.  Conductor Slum, who is too old a bird to

     be caught with chaff, courteously informed her that the car was

     full, and when she insisted on remaining, he persuaded her to go

     into the car where she belonged.  Thereupon a young sprig, from the

     East, blustered like a Shanghai rooster, and began to sass the

     conductor with his chin music.  That gentleman delivered the young

     aspirant for a muss one of his elegant little left-handers, which so

     astonished him that he began to feel for his shooter.  Whereupon Mr.

     Slum gently raised the youth, carried him forth, and set him down

     just outside the car to cool off.  Whether the young blood has yet

     made his way out of Bascom's swamp, we have not learned.  Conductor

     Slum is one of the most gentlemanly and efficient officers on the

     road; but he ain't trifled with, not much.  We learn that the

     company have put a new engine on the seven o'clock train, and newly

     upholstered the drawing-room car throughout.  It spares no effort

     for the comfort of the traveling public."



Philip never had been before in Bascom's swamp, and there was nothing

inviting in it to detain him.  After the train got out of the way he

crawled out of the briars and the mud, and got upon the track.  He was

somewhat bruised, but he was too angry to mind that.  He plodded along

over the ties in a very hot condition of mind and body.  In the scuffle,

his railway check had disappeared, and he grimly wondered, as he noticed

the loss, if the company would permit him to walk over their track if

they should know he hadn't a ticket.



Philip had to walk some five miles before he reached a little station,

where he could wait for a train, and he had ample time for reflection.

At first he was full of vengeance on the company.  He would sue it.  He

would make it pay roundly.  But then it occurred to him that he did not

know the name of a witness he could summon, and that a personal fight

against a railway corporation was about the most hopeless in the world.

He then thought he would seek out that conductor, lie in wait for him at

some station, and thrash him, or get thrashed himself.



But as he got cooler, that did not seem to him a project worthy of a

gentleman exactly.  Was it possible for a gentleman to get even with such

a fellow as that conductor on the letter's own plane?  And when he came

to this point, he began to ask himself, if he had not acted very much

like a fool.  He didn't regret striking the fellow--he hoped he had left

a mark on him.  But, after all, was that the best way?  Here was he,

Philip Sterling, calling himself a gentleman, in a brawl with a vulgar

conductor, about a woman he had never seen before.  Why should he have

put himself in such a ridiculous position?  Wasn't it enough to have

offered the lady his seat, to have rescued her from an accident, perhaps

from death?  Suppose he had simply said to the conductor, "Sir, your

conduct is brutal, I shall report you."  The passengers, who saw the

affair, might have joined in a report against the conductor, and he might

really have accomplished something.  And, now!  Philip looked at leis

torn clothes, and thought with disgust of his haste in getting into a

fight with such an autocrat.



At the little station where Philip waited for the next train, he met a

man--who turned out to be a justice of the peace in that neighborhood,

and told him his adventure.  He was a kindly sort of man, and seemed very

much interested.



"Dum 'em," said he, when he had heard the story.



"Do you think any thing can be done, sir?"



"Wal, I guess tain't no use.  I hain't a mite of doubt of every word you

say.  But suin's no use.  The railroad company owns all these people

along here, and the judges on the bench too.  Spiled your clothes!  Wal,

'least said's soonest mended.'  You haint no chance with the company."



When next morning, he read the humorous account in the Patriot and

Clarion, he saw still more clearly what chance he would have had before

the public in a fight with the railroad company.



Still Philip's conscience told him that it was his plain duty to carry

the matter into the courts, even with the certainty of defeat.

He confessed that neither he nor any citizen had a right to consult his

own feelings or conscience in a case where a law of the land had been

violated before his own eyes.  He confessed that every citizen's first

duty in such case is to put aside his own business and devote his time

and his best efforts to seeing that the infraction is promptly punished;

and he knew that no country can be well governed unless its citizens as

a body keep religiously before their minds that they are the guardians

of the law, and that the law officers are only the machinery for its

execution, nothing more.  As a finality he was obliged to confess that he

was a bad citizen, and also that the general laxity of the time, and the

absence of a sense of duty toward any part of the community but the

individual himself were ingrained in him, am he was no better than the

rest of the people.



The result of this little adventure was that Philip did not reach Ilium

till daylight the next morning, when he descended sleepy and sore, from a

way train, and looked about him.  Ilium was in a narrow mountain gorge,

through which a rapid stream ran.  It consisted of the plank platform on

which he stood, a wooden house, half painted, with a dirty piazza

(unroofed) in front, and a sign board hung on a slanting pole--bearing

the legend, "Hotel. P. Dusenheimer," a sawmill further down the stream,

a blacksmith-shop, and a store, and three or four unpainted dwellings of

the slab variety.



As Philip approached the hotel he saw what appeared to be a wild beast

crouching on the piazza.  It did not stir, however, and he soon found

that it was only a stuffed skin.  This cheerful invitation to the tavern

was the remains of a huge panther which had been killed in the region a

few weeks before.  Philip examined his ugly visage and strong crooked

fore-arm, as he was waiting admittance, having pounded upon the door.



"Yait a bit.  I'll shoost--put on my trowsers," shouted a voice from the

window, and the door was soon opened by the yawning landlord.



"Morgen!  Didn't hear d' drain oncet.  Dem boys geeps me up zo spate.

Gom right in."



Philip was shown into a dirty bar-room.  It was a small room, with a

stove in the middle, set in a long shallow box of sand, for the benefit

of the "spitters," a bar across one end--a mere counter with a sliding

glass-case behind it containing a few bottles having ambitious labels,

and a wash-sink in one corner.  On the walls were the bright yellow and

black handbills of a traveling circus, with pictures of acrobats in human

pyramids, horses flying in long leaps through the air, and sylph-like

women in a paradisaic costume, balancing themselves upon the tips of

their toes on the bare backs of frantic and plunging steeds, and kissing

their hands to the spectators meanwhile.



As Philip did not desire a room at that hour, he was invited to wash

himself at the nasty sink, a feat somewhat easier than drying his face,

for the towel that hung in a roller over the sink was evidently as much a

fixture as the sink itself, and belonged, like the suspended brush and

comb, to the traveling public.  Philip managed to complete his toilet by

the use of his pocket-handkerchief, and declining the hospitality of the

landlord, implied in the remark, "You won'd dake notin'?" he went into

the open air to wait for breakfast.



The country he saw was wild but not picturesque.  The mountain before him

might be eight hundred feet high, and was only a portion of a long

unbroken range, savagely wooded, which followed the stream.  Behind the

hotel, and across the brawling brook, was another level-topped, wooded

range exactly like it.  Ilium itself, seen at a glance, was old enough to

be dilapidated, and if it had gained anything by being made a wood and

water station of the new railroad, it was only a new sort of grime and

rawness.  P. Dusenheimer, standing in the door of his uninviting

groggery, when the trains stopped for water; never received from the

traveling public any patronage except facetious remarks upon his personal

appearance.  Perhaps a thousand times he had heard the remark, "Ilium

fuit," followed in most instances by a hail to himself as "AEneas," with

the inquiry "Where is old Anchises?"  At first he had replied, "Dere

ain't no such man;" but irritated by its senseless repetition, he had

latterly dropped into the formula of, "You be dam."



Philip was recalled from the contemplation of Ilium by the rolling and

growling of the gong within the hotel, the din and clamor increasing till

the house was apparently unable to contain it; when it burst out of the

front door and informed the world that breakfast was on the table.



The dining room was long, low and narrow, and a narrow table extended its

whole length.  Upon this was spread a cloth which from appearance might

have been as long in use as the towel in the barroom.  Upon the table was

the usual service, the heavy, much nicked stone ware, the row of plated

and rusty castors, the sugar bowls with the zinc tea-spoons sticking up

in them, the piles of yellow biscuits, the discouraged-looking plates of

butter.  The landlord waited, and Philip was pleased to observe the

change in his manner.  In the barroom he was the conciliatory landlord.

Standing behind his guests at table, he had an air of peremptory

patronage, and the voice in which he shot out the inquiry, as he seized

Philip's plate, "Beefsteak or liver?" quite took away Philip's power of

choice.  He begged for a glass of milk, after trying that green hued

compound called coffee, and made his breakfast out of that and some hard

crackers which seemed to have been imported into Ilium before the

introduction of the iron horse, and to have withstood a ten years siege

of regular boarders, Greeks and others.



The land that Philip had come to look at was at least five miles distant

from Ilium station.  A corner of it touched the railroad, but the rest

was pretty much an unbroken wilderness, eight or ten thousand acres of

rough country, most of it such a mountain range as he saw at Ilium.



His first step was to hire three woodsmen to accompany him.  By their

help he built a log hut, and established a camp on the land, and then

began his explorations, mapping down his survey as he went along, noting

the timber, and the lay of the land, and making superficial observations

as to the prospect of coal.



The landlord at Ilium endeavored to persuade Philip to hire the services

of a witch-hazel professor of that region, who could walk over the land

with his wand and tell him infallibly whether it contained coal, and

exactly where the strata ran.  But Philip preferred to trust to his own

study of the country, and his knowledge of the geological formation.

He spent a month in traveling over the land and making calculations;

and made up his mind that a fine vein of coal ran through the mountain

about a mile from the railroad, and that the place to run in a tunnel was

half way towards its summit.



Acting with his usual promptness, Philip, with the consent of Mr. Bolton,

broke ground there at once, and, before snow came, had some rude

buildings up, and was ready for active operations in the spring.  It was

true that there were no outcroppings of coal at the place, and the people

at Ilium said he "mought as well dig for plug terbaccer there;" but

Philip had great faith in the uniformity of nature's operations in ages

past, and he had no doubt that he should strike at this spot the rich

vein that had made the fortune of the Golden Briar Company.









CHAPTER XXX.



Once more Louise had good news from her Washington--Senator Dilworthy was

going to sell the Tennessee Land to the government!  Louise told Laura in

confidence.  She had told her parents, too, and also several bosom

friends; but all of these people had simply looked sad when they heard

the news, except Laura.  Laura's face suddenly brightened under it--only

for an instant, it is true, but poor Louise was grateful for even that

fleeting ray of encouragement.  When next Laura was alone, she fell into

a train of thought something like this:



"If the Senator has really taken hold of this matter, I may look for that

invitation to his house at, any moment.  I am perishing to go!  I do long

to know whether I am only simply a large-sized pigmy among these pigmies

here, who tumble over so easily when one strikes them, or whether I am

really--."  Her thoughts drifted into other channels, for a season.

Then she continued:-- "He said I could be useful in the great cause of

philanthropy, and help in the blessed work of uplifting the poor and the

ignorant, if he found it feasible to take hold of our Land.  Well, that

is neither here nor there; what I want, is to go to Washington and find

out what I am.  I want money, too; and if one may judge by what she

hears, there are chances there for a--."  For a fascinating woman, she

was going to say, perhaps, but she did not.



Along in the fall the invitation came, sure enough.  It came officially

through brother Washington, the private Secretary, who appended a

postscript that was brimming with delight over the prospect of seeing the

Duchess again.  He said it would be happiness enough to look upon her

face once more--it would be almost too much happiness when to it was

added the fact that she would bring messages with her that were fresh

from Louise's lips.



In Washington's letter were several important enclosures.  For instance,

there was the Senator's check for $2,000--"to buy suitable clothing in

New York with!"  It was a loan to be refunded when the Land was sold.

Two thousand--this was fine indeed.  Louise's father was called rich, but

Laura doubted if Louise had ever had $400 worth of new clothing at one

time in her life.  With the check came two through tickets--good on the

railroad from Hawkeye to Washington via New York--and they were

"dead-head" tickets, too, which had been given to Senator Dilworthy by

the railway companies.  Senators and representatives were paid thousands

of dollars by the government for traveling expenses, but they always

traveled "deadhead" both ways, and then did as any honorable, high-minded

men would naturally do--declined to receive the mileage tendered them by

the government.  The Senator had plenty of railway passes, and could.

easily spare two to Laura--one for herself and one for a male escort.

Washington suggested that she get some old friend of the family to come

with her, and said the Senator would "deadhead" him home again as soon as

he had grown tired, of the sights of the capital.  Laura thought the

thing over.  At first she was pleased with the idea, but presently she

began to feel differently about it.  Finally she said, "No, our staid,

steady-going Hawkeye friends' notions and mine differ about some things

--they respect me, now, and I respect them--better leave it so--I will go

alone; I am not afraid to travel by myself."  And so communing with

herself, she left the house for an afternoon walk.



Almost at the door she met Col. Sellers.  She told him about her

invitation to Washington.



"Bless me!" said the Colonel.  "I have about made up my mind to go there

myself.  You see we've got to get another appropriation through, and the

Company want me to come east and put it through Congress.  Harry's there,

and he'll do what he can, of course; and Harry's a good fellow and always

does the very best he knows how, but then he's young--rather young for

some parts of such work, you know--and besides he talks too much, talks a

good deal too much; and sometimes he appears to be a little bit

visionary, too, I think the worst thing in the world for a business man.

A man like that always exposes his cards, sooner or later.  This sort of

thing wants an old, quiet, steady hand--wants an old cool head, you know,

that knows men, through and through, and is used to large operations.

I'm expecting my salary, and also some dividends from the company, and if

they get along in time, I'll go along with you Laura--take you under my

wing--you mustn't travel alone.  Lord I wish I had the money right now.

--But there'll be plenty soon--plenty."



Laura reasoned with herself that if the kindly, simple-hearted Colonel

was going anyhow, what could she gain by traveling alone and throwing

away his company?  So she told him she accepted his offer gladly,

gratefully.  She said it would be the greatest of favors if he would go

with her and protect her--not at his own expense as far as railway fares

were concerned, of course; she could not expect him to put himself to so

much trouble for her and pay his fare besides.  But he wouldn't hear of

her paying his fare--it would be only a pleasure to him to serve her.

Laura insisted on furnishing the tickets; and finally, when argument

failed, she said the tickets cost neither her nor any one else a cent

--she had two of them--she needed but one--and if he would not take the

other she would not go with him.  That settled the matter.  He took the

ticket.  Laura was glad that she had the check for new clothing, for she

felt very certain of being able to get the Colonel to borrow a little of

the money to pay hotel bills with, here and there.



She wrote Washington to look for her and Col. Sellers toward the end of

November; and at about the time set the two travelers arrived safe in the

capital of the nation, sure enough.









CHAPTER XXXI





               She the, gracious lady, yet no paines did spare

               To doe him ease, or doe him remedy:

               Many restoratives of vertues rare

               And costly cordialles she did apply,

               To mitigate his stubborne malady.

                                        Spenser's Faerie Queens.



Mr. Henry Brierly was exceedingly busy in New York, so he wrote Col.

Sellers, but he would drop everything and go to Washington.



The Colonel believed that Harry was the prince of lobbyists, a little too

sanguine, may be, and given to speculation, but, then, he knew everybody;

the Columbus River navigation scheme was, got through almost entirely by

his aid.  He was needed now to help through another scheme, a benevolent

scheme in which Col. Sellers, through the Hawkinses, had a deep interest.



"I don't care, you know," he wrote to Harry, "so much about the niggroes.

But if the government will buy this land, it will set up the Hawkins

family--make Laura an heiress--and I shouldn't wonder if Beriah Sellers

would set up his carriage again.  Dilworthy looks at it different,

of course.  He's all for philanthropy, for benefiting the colored race.

There's old Balsam, was in the Interior--used to be the Rev. Orson Balsam

of Iowa--he's made the riffle on the Injun; great Injun pacificator and

land dealer.  Balaam'a got the Injun to himself, and I suppose that

Senator Dilworthy feels that there is nothing left him but the colored

man.  I do reckon he is the best friend the colored man has got in

Washington."



Though Harry was in a hurry to reach Washington, he stopped in

Philadelphia; and prolonged his visit day after day, greatly to the

detriment of his business both in New York and Washington.  The society

at the Bolton's might have been a valid excuse for neglecting business

much more important than his.  Philip was there; he was a partner with

Mr. Bolton now in the new coal venture, concerning which there was much

to be arranged in preparation for the Spring work, and Philip lingered

week after week in the hospitable house.  Alice was making a winter

visit.  Ruth only went to town twice a week to attend lectures, and the

household was quite to Mr. Bolton's taste, for he liked the cheer of

company and something going on evenings.  Harry was cordially asked to

bring his traveling-bag there, and he did not need urging to do so.

Not even the thought of seeing Laura at the capital made him restless in

the society of the two young ladies; two birds in hand are worth one in

the bush certainly.



Philip was at home--he sometimes wished he were not so much so.  He felt

that too much or not enough was taken for granted.  Ruth had met him,

when he first came, with a cordial frankness, and her manner continued

entirely unrestrained.  She neither sought his company nor avoided it,

and this perfectly level treatment irritated him more than any other

could have done.  It was impossible to advance much in love-making with

one who offered no obstacles, had no concealments and no embarrassments,

and whom any approach to sentimentality would be quite likely to set into

a fit of laughter.



"Why, Phil," she would say, "what puts you in the dumps to day?  You are

as solemn as the upper bench in Meeting.  I shall have to call Alice to

raise your spirits; my presence seems to depress you."



"It's not your presence, but your absence when you are present," began

Philip, dolefully, with the idea that he was saying a rather deep thing.

"But you won't understand me."



"No, I confess I cannot.  If you really are so low, as to think I am

absent when I am present, it's a frightful case of aberration; I shall

ask father to bring out Dr. Jackson.  Does Alice appear to be present

when she is absent?"



"Alice has some human feeling, anyway.  She cares for something besides

musty books and dry bones.  I think, Ruth, when I die," said Philip,

intending to be very grim and sarcastic, "I'll leave you my skeleton.

You might like that."



"It might be more cheerful than you are at times," Ruth replied with a

laugh.  "But you mustn't do it without consulting Alice.  She might not.

like it."



"I don't know why you should bring Alice up on every occasion.  Do you

think I am in love with her?"



"Bless you, no.  It never entered my head.  Are you?  The thought of

Philip Sterling in love is too comical.  I thought you were only in love

with the Ilium coal mine, which you and father talk about half the time."



This is a specimen of Philip's wooing.  Confound the girl, he would say

to himself, why does she never tease Harry and that young Shepley who

comes here?



How differently Alice treated him.  She at least never mocked him, and it

was a relief to talk with one who had some sympathy with him.  And he did

talk to her, by the hour, about Ruth.  The blundering fellow poured all

his doubts and anxieties into her ear, as if she had been the impassive

occupant of one of those little wooden confessionals in the Cathedral on

Logan Square.  Has, a confessor, if she is young and pretty, any feeling?

Does it mend the matter by calling her your sister?



Philip called Alice his good sister, and talked to her about love and

marriage, meaning Ruth, as if sisters could by no possibility have any

personal concern in such things.  Did Ruth ever speak of him?  Did she

think Ruth cared for him?  Did Ruth care for anybody at Fallkill?  Did

she care for anything except her profession?  And so on.



Alice was loyal to Ruth, and if she knew anything she did not betray her

friend.  She did not, at any rate, give Philip too much encouragement.

What woman, under the circumstances, would?



"I can tell you one thing, Philip," she said, "if ever Ruth Bolton loves,

it will be with her whole soul, in a depth of passion that will sweep

everything before it and surprise even herself."



A remark that did not much console Philip, who imagined that only some

grand heroism could unlock the sweetness of such a heart; and Philip

feared that he wasn't a hero.  He did not know out of what materials a

woman can construct a hero, when she is in the creative mood.



Harry skipped into this society with his usual lightness and gaiety.

His good nature was inexhaustible, and though he liked to relate his own

exploits, he had a little tact in adapting himself to the tastes of his

hearers.  He was not long in finding out that Alice liked to hear about

Philip, and Harry launched out into the career of his friend in the West,

with a prodigality of invention that would have astonished the chief

actor.  He was the most generous fellow in the world, and picturesque

conversation was the one thing in which he never was bankrupt.  With Mr.

Bolton he was the serious man of business, enjoying the confidence of

many of the monied men in New York, whom Mr. Bolton knew, and engaged

with them in railway schemes and government contracts.  Philip, who had

so long known Harry, never could make up his mind that Harry did not

himself believe that he was a chief actor in all these large operations

of which he talked so much.



Harry did not neglect to endeavor to make himself agreeable to Mrs.

Bolton, by paying great attention to the children, and by professing the

warmest interest in the Friends' faith.  It always seemed to him the most

peaceful religion; he thought it must be much easier to live by an

internal light than by a lot of outward rules; he had a dear Quaker aunt

in Providence of whom Mrs. Bolton constantly reminded him.  He insisted

upon going with Mrs. Bolton and the children to the Friends Meeting on

First Day, when Ruth and Alice and Philip, "world's people," went to a

church in town, and he sat through the hour of silence with his hat on,

in most exemplary patience.  In short, this amazing actor succeeded so

well with Mrs. Bolton, that she said to Philip one day,



"Thy friend, Henry Brierly, appears to be a very worldly minded young

man.  Does he believe in anything?"



"Oh, yes," said Philip laughing, "he believes in more things than any

other person I ever saw."



To Ruth, Harry seemed to be very congenial.  He was never moody for one

thing, but lent himself with alacrity to whatever her fancy was.  He was

gay or grave as the need might be.  No one apparently could enter more

fully into her plans for an independent career.



"My father," said Harry, "was bred a physician, and practiced a little

before he went into Wall street.  I always had a leaning to the study.

There was a skeleton hanging in the closet of my father's study when I

was a boy, that I used to dress up in old clothes.  Oh, I got quite

familiar with the human frame."



"You must have," said Philip.  "Was that where you learned to play the

bones?  He is a master of those musical instruments, Ruth; he plays well

enough to go on the stage."



"Philip hates science of any kind, and steady application," retorted

Harry.  He didn't fancy Philip's banter, and when the latter had gone

out, and Ruth asked,



"Why don't you take up medicine, Mr. Brierly?"



Harry said, "I have it in mind.  I believe I would begin attending

lectures this winter if it weren't for being wanted in Washington.  But

medicine is particularly women's province."



"Why so?" asked Ruth, rather amused.



"Well, the treatment of disease is a good deal a matter of sympathy.

A woman's intuition is better than a man's.  Nobody knows anything,

really, you know, and a woman can guess a good deal nearer than a man."



"You are very complimentary to my sex."



"But," said Harry frankly; "I should want to choose my doctor; an ugly

woman would ruin me, the disease would be sure to strike in and kill me

at sight of her.  I think a pretty physician, with engaging manners,

would coax a fellow to live through almost anything."



"I am afraid you are a scoffer, Mr. Brierly."



"On the contrary, I am quite sincere.  Wasn't it old what's his name?

that said only the beautiful is useful?"



Whether Ruth was anything more than diverted with Harry's company; Philip

could not determine.  He scorned at any rate to advance his own interest

by any disparaging communications about Harry, both because he could not

help liking the fellow himself, and because he may have known that he

could not more surely create a sympathy for him in Ruth's mind.  That

Ruth was in no danger of any serious impression he felt pretty sure,

felt certain of it when he reflected upon her severe occupation with her

profession.  Hang it, he would say to himself, she is nothing but pure

intellect anyway.  And he only felt uncertain of it when she was in one

of her moods of raillery, with mocking mischief in her eyes.  At such

times she seemed to prefer Harry's society to his.  When Philip was

miserable about this, he always took refuge with Alice, who was never

moody, and who generally laughed him out of his sentimental nonsense.

He felt at his ease with Alice, and was never in want of something to

talk about; and he could not account for the fact that he was so often

dull with Ruth, with whom, of all persons in the world, he wanted to

appear at his best.



Harry was entirely satisfied with his own situation.  A bird of passage

is always at its ease, having no house to build, and no responsibility.

He talked freely with Philip about Ruth, an almighty fine girl, he said,

but what the deuce she wanted to study medicine for, he couldn't see.



There was a concert one night at the Musical Fund Hall and the four had

arranged to go in and return by the Germantown cars.  It was Philip's

plan, who had engaged the seats, and promised himself an evening with

Ruth, walking with her, sitting by her in the hall, and enjoying the

feeling of protecting that a man always has of a woman in a public place.

He was fond of music, too, in a sympathetic way; at least, he knew that

Ruth's delight in it would be enough for him.



Perhaps he meant to take advantage of the occasion to say some very

serious things.  His love for Ruth was no secret to Mrs. Bolton, and he

felt almost sure that he should have no opposition in the family.  Mrs.

Bolton had been cautious in what she said, but Philip inferred everything

from her reply to his own questions, one day, "Has thee ever spoken thy

mind to Ruth?"



Why shouldn't he speak his mind, and end his doubts?  Ruth had been more

tricksy than usual that day, and in a flow of spirits quite inconsistent,

it would seem, in a young lady devoted to grave studies.



Had Ruth a premonition of Philip's intention, in his manner?  It may be,

for when the girls came down stairs, ready to walk to the cars; and met

Philip and Harry in the hall, Ruth said, laughing,



"The two tallest must walk together" and before Philip knew how it

happened Ruth had taken Harry's arm, and his evening was spoiled.  He had

too much politeness and good sense and kindness to show in his manner

that he was hit.  So he said to Harry,



"That's your disadvantage in being short."  And he gave Alice no reason

to feel during the evening that she would not have been his first choice

for the excursion.  But he was none the less chagrined, and not a little

angry at the turn the affair took.



The Hall was crowded with the fashion of the town.  The concert was one

of those fragmentary drearinesses that people endure because they are

fashionable; tours de force on the piano, and fragments from operas,

which have no meaning without the setting, with weary pauses of waiting

between; there is the comic basso who is so amusing and on such familiar

terms with the audience, and always sings the Barber; the attitudinizing

tenor, with his languishing "Oh, Summer Night;" the soprano with her

"Batti Batti," who warbles and trills and runs and fetches her breath,

and ends with a noble scream that brings down a tempest of applause in

the midst of which she backs off the stage smiling and bowing.  It was

this sort of concert, and Philip was thinking that it was the most stupid

one he ever sat through, when just as the soprano was in the midst of

that touching ballad, "Comin' thro' the Rye" (the soprano always sings

"Comin' thro' the Rye" on an encore)--the Black Swan used to make it

irresistible, Philip remembered, with her arch, "If a body kiss a body"

there was a cry of "Fire!"



The hall is long and narrow, and there is only one place of egress.

Instantly the audience was on its feet, and a rush began for the door.

Men shouted, women screamed, and panic seized the swaying mass.

A second's thought would have convinced every one that getting out was

impossible, and that the only effect of a rush would be to crash people

to death.  But a second's thought was not given.  A few cried:



"Sit down, sit down," but the mass was turned towards the door.  Women

were down and trampled on in the aisles, and stout men, utterly lost to

self-control, were mounting the benches, as if to run a race over the

mass to the entrance.



Philip who had forced the girls to keep their seats saw, in a flash, the

new danger, and sprang to avert it.  In a second more those infuriated

men would be over the benches and crushing Ruth and Alice under their

boots.  He leaped upon the bench in front of them and struck out before

him with all his might, felling one man who was rushing on him, and

checking for an instant the movement, or rather parting it, and causing

it to flow on either side of him.  But it was only for an instant; the

pressure behind was too great, and, the next Philip was  dashed backwards

over the seat.



And yet that instant of arrest had probably saved the girls, for as

Philip fell, the orchestra struck up "Yankee Doodle" in the liveliest

manner.  The familiar tune caught the ear of the mass, which paused in

wonder, and gave the conductor's voice a chance to be heard--"It's a

false alarm!"



The tumult was over in a minute, and the next, laughter was heard, and

not a few said, "I knew it wasn't anything."  "What fools people are at

such a time."



The concert was over, however.  A good many people were hurt, some of

them seriously, and among them Philip Sterling was found bent across the

seat, insensible, with his left arm hanging limp and a bleeding wound on

his head.



When he was carried into the air he revived, and said it was nothing.

A surgeon was called, and it was thought best to drive at once to the

Bolton's, the surgeon supporting Philip, who did not speak the whole way.

His arm was set and his head dressed, and the surgeon said he would come

round all right in his mind by morning; he was very weak.  Alice who was

not much frightened while the panic lasted in the hall, was very much

unnerved by seeing Philip so pale and bloody.  Ruth assisted the surgeon

with the utmost coolness and with skillful hands helped to dress Philip's

wounds.  And there was a certain intentness and fierce energy in what she

did that might have revealed something to Philip if he had been in his

senses.



But he was not, or he would not have murmured "Let Alice do it, she is

not too tall."



It was Ruth's first case.









CHAPTER, XXXII.



Washington's delight in his beautiful sister was measureless.  He said

that she had always been the queenliest creature in the land, but that

she was only commonplace before, compared to what she was now, so

extraordinary was the improvement wrought by rich fashionable attire.



"But your criticisms are too full of brotherly partiality to be depended

on, Washington.  Other people will judge differently."



"Indeed they won't.  You'll see.  There will never be a woman in

Washington that can compare with you.  You'll be famous within a

fortnight, Laura.  Everybody will want to know you.  You wait--you'll

see."



Laura wished in her heart that the prophecy might come true; and

privately she even believed it might--for she had brought all the women

whom she had seen since she left home under sharp inspection, and the

result had not been unsatisfactory to her.



During a week or two Washington drove about the city every day with her

and familiarized her with all of its salient features.  She was beginning

to feel very much at home with the town itself, and she was also fast

acquiring ease with the distinguished people she met at the Dilworthy

table, and losing what little of country timidity she had brought with

her from Hawkeye.  She noticed with secret pleasure the little start of

admiration that always manifested itself in the faces of the guests when

she entered the drawing-room arrayed in evening costume: she took

comforting note of the fact that these guests directed a very liberal

share of their conversation toward her; she observed with surprise, that

famous statesmen and soldiers did not talk like gods, as a general thing,

but said rather commonplace things for the most part; and she was filled

with gratification to discover that she, on the contrary, was making a

good many shrewd speeches and now and then a really brilliant one, and

furthermore, that they were beginning to be repeated in social circles

about the town.



Congress began its sittings, and every day or two Washington escorted her

to the galleries set apart for lady members of the households of Senators

and Representatives.  Here was a larger field and a wider competition,

but still she saw that many eyes were uplifted toward her face, and that

first one person and then another called a neighbor's attention to her;

she was not too dull to perceive that the speeches of some of the younger

statesmen were delivered about as much and perhaps more at her than to

the presiding officer; and she was not sorry to see that the dapper young

Senator from Iowa came at once and stood in the open space before the

president's desk to exhibit his feet as soon as she entered the gallery,

whereas she had early learned from common report that his usual custom

was to prop them on his desk and enjoy them himself with a selfish

disregard of other people's longings.



Invitations began to flow in upon her and soon she was fairly "in

society."  "The season" was now in full bloom, and the first select

reception was at hand that is to say, a reception confined to invited

guests.  Senator Dilworthy had become well convinced; by this time, that

his judgment of the country-bred Missouri girl had not deceived him--it

was plain that she was going to be a peerless missionary in the field of

labor he designed her for, and therefore it would be perfectly safe and

likewise judicious to send her forth well panoplied for her work.--So he

had added new and still richer costumes to her wardrobe, and assisted

their attractions with costly jewelry-loans on the future land sale.



This first select reception took place at a cabinet minister's--or rather

a cabinet secretary's mansion.  When Laura and the Senator arrived, about

half past nine or ten in the evening, the place was already pretty well

crowded, and the white-gloved negro servant at the door was still

receiving streams of guests.--The drawing-rooms were brilliant with

gaslight, and as hot as ovens.  The host and hostess stood just within

the door of entrance; Laura was presented, and then she passed on into

the maelstrom of be-jeweled and richly attired low-necked ladies and

white-kid-gloved and steel pen-coated gentlemen and wherever she moved

she was followed by a buzz of admiration that was grateful to all her

senses--so grateful, indeed, that her white face was tinged and its

beauty heightened by a perceptible suffusion of color.  She caught such

remarks as, "Who is she?"  "Superb woman!"  "That is the new beauty from

the west," etc., etc.



Whenever she halted, she was presently surrounded by Ministers, Generals,

Congressmen, and all manner of aristocratic, people.  Introductions

followed, and then the usual original question, "How do you like

Washington, Miss Hawkins?" supplemented by that other usual original

question, "Is this your first visit?"



These two exciting topics being exhausted, conversation generally drifted

into calmer channels, only to be interrupted at frequent intervals by new

introductions and new inquiries as to how Laura liked the capital and

whether it was her first visit or not.  And thus for an hour or more the

Duchess moved through the crush in a rapture of happiness, for her doubts

were dead and gone, now she knew she could conquer here.  A familiar face

appeared in the midst of the multitude and Harry Brierly fought his

difficult way to her side, his eyes shouting their gratification, so to

speak:



"Oh, this is a happiness!  Tell me, my dear Miss Hawkins--"



"Sh!  I know what you are going to ask.  I do like Washington--I like it

ever so much!"



"No, but I was going to ask--"



"Yes, I am coming to it, coming to it as fast as I can.  It is my first

visit.  I think you should know that yourself."



And straightway a wave of the crowd swept her beyond his reach.



"Now what can the girl mean?  Of course she likes Washington--I'm not

such a dummy as to have to ask her that.  And as to its being her first

visit, why bang it, she knows that I knew it was.  Does she think I have

turned idiot?  Curious girl, anyway.  But how they do swarm about her!

She is the reigning belle of Washington after this night.  She'll know

five hundred of the heaviest guns in the town before this night's

nonsense is over.  And this isn't even the beginning.  Just as I used to

say--she'll be a card in the matter of--yes sir!  She shall turn the

men's heads and I'll turn the women's!  What a team that will be in

politics here.  I wouldn't take a quarter of a million for what I can do

in this present session--no indeed I wouldn't.  Now, here--I don't

altogether like this.  That insignificant secretary of legation is--why,

she's smiling on him as if he--and now on the Admiral!  Now she's

illuminating that, stuffy Congressman from Massachusetts--vulgar

ungrammatcal shovel-maker--greasy knave of spades.  I don't like this

sort of thing.  She doesn't appear to be much distressed about me--she

hasn't looked this way once.  All right, my bird of Paradise, if it suits

you, go on.  But I think I know your sex.  I'll go to smiling around a

little, too, and see what effect that will have on you"



And he did "smile around a little," and got as near to her as he could to

watch the effect, but the scheme was a failure--he could not get her

attention.  She seemed wholly unconscious of him, and so he could not

flirt with any spirit; he could only talk disjointedly; he could not keep

his eyes on the charmers he talked to; he grew irritable, jealous, and

very, unhappy.  He gave up his enterprise, leaned his shoulder against a

fluted pilaster and pouted while he kept watch upon Laura's every

movement.  His other shoulder stole the bloom from many a lovely cheek

that brushed him in the surging crush, but he noted it not.  He was too

busy cursing himself inwardly for being an egotistical imbecile.  An hour

ago he had thought to take this country lass under his protection and

show her "life" and enjoy her wonder and delight--and here she was,

immersed in the marvel up to her eyes, and just a trifle more at home in

it than he was himself.  And now his angry comments ran on again:



"Now she's sweetening old Brother Balaam; and he--well he is inviting her

to the Congressional prayer-meeting, no doubt--better let old Dilworthy

alone to see that she doesn't overlook that.  And now its Splurge, of New

York; and now its Batters of New Hampshire--and now the Vice President!

Well I may as well adjourn.  I've got enough."



But he hadn't.  He got as far as the door--and then struggled back to

take one more look, hating himself all the while for his weakness.



Toward midnight, when supper was announced, the crowd thronged to the

supper room where a long table was decked out with what seemed a rare

repast, but which consisted of things better calculated to feast the eye

than the appetite.  The ladies were soon seated in files along the wall,

and in groups here and there, and the colored waiters filled the plates

and glasses and the, male guests moved hither and thither conveying them

to the privileged sex.



Harry took an ice and stood up by the table with other gentlemen, and

listened to the buzz of conversation while he ate.



From these remarks he learned a good deal about Laura that was news to

him.  For instance, that she was of a distinguished western family; that

she was highly educated; that she was very rich and a great landed

heiress; that she was not a professor of religion, and yet was a

Christian in the truest and best sense of the word, for her whole heart

was devoted to the accomplishment of a great and noble enterprise--none

other than the sacrificing of her landed estates to the uplifting of the

down-trodden negro and the turning of his erring feet into the way of

light and righteousness.  Harry observed that as soon as one listener had

absorbed the story, he turned about and delivered it to his next neighbor

and the latter individual straightway passed it on.  And thus he saw it

travel the round of the gentlemen and overflow rearward among the ladies.

He could not trace it backward to its fountain head, and so he could not

tell who it was that started it.



One thing annoyed Harry a great deal; and that was the reflection that he

might have been in Washington days and days ago and thrown his

fascinations about Laura with permanent effect while she was new and

strange to the capital, instead of dawdling in Philadelphia to no

purpose.  He feared he had "missed a trick," as he expressed it.



He only found one little opportunity of speaking again with Laura before

the evening's festivities ended, and then, for the first time in years,

his airy self-complacency failed him, his tongue's easy confidence

forsook it in a great measure, and he was conscious of an unheroic

timidity.  He was glad to get away and find a place where he could

despise himself in private and try to grow his clipped plumes again.



When Laura reached home she was tired but exultant, and Senator Dilworthy

was pleased and satisfied.  He called Laura "my daughter," next morning,

and gave her some "pin money," as he termed it, and she sent a hundred

and fifty dollars of it to her mother and loaned a trifle to Col.

Sellers.  Then the Senator had a long private conference with Laura, and

unfolded certain plans of his for the good of the country, and religion,

and the poor, and temperance, and showed her how she could assist him in

developing these worthy and noble enterprises.









CHAPTER XXXIII.



Laura soon discovered that there were three distinct aristocracies in

Washington.  One of these, (nick-named the Antiques,) consisted of

cultivated, high-bred old families who looked back with pride upon an

ancestry that had been always great in the nation's councils and its wars

from the birth of the republic downward.  Into this select circle it was

difficult to gain admission.  No. 2 was the aristocracy of the middle

ground--of which, more anon.  No. 3 lay beyond; of it we will say a word

here.  We will call it the Aristocracy of the Parvenus--as, indeed, the

general public did.  Official position, no matter how obtained, entitled

a man to a place in it, and carried his family with him, no matter whence

they sprang.  Great wealth gave a man a still higher and nobler place in

it than did official position.  If this wealth had been acquired by

conspicuous ingenuity, with just a pleasant little spice of illegality

about it, all the better.  This aristocracy was "fast," and not averse to

ostentation.



The aristocracy of the Antiques ignored the aristocracy of the Parvenus;

the Parvenus laughed at the Antiques, (and secretly envied them.)



There were certain important "society" customs which one in Laura's

position needed to understand.  For instance, when a lady of any

prominence comes to one of our cities and takes up her residence, all the

ladies of her grade favor her in turn with an initial call, giving their

cards to the servant at the door by way of introduction.  They come

singly, sometimes; sometimes in couples; and always in elaborate full

dress.  They talk two minutes and a quarter and then go.  If the lady

receiving the call desires a further acquaintance, she must return the

visit within two weeks; to neglect it beyond that time means "let the

matter drop."  But if she does return the visit within two weeks, it then

becomes the other party's privilege to continue the acquaintance or drop

it.  She signifies her willingness to continue it by calling again any

time within twelve-months; after that, if the parties go on calling upon

each other once a year, in our large cities, that is sufficient, and the

acquaintanceship holds good.  The thing goes along smoothly, now.

The annual visits are made and returned with peaceful regularity and

bland satisfaction, although it is not necessary that the two ladies

shall actually see each other oftener than once every few years.  Their

cards preserve the intimacy and keep the acquaintanceship intact.



For instance, Mrs. A.  pays her annual visit, sits in her carriage and

sends in her card with the lower right hand corner turned down, which

signifies that she has "called in person;" Mrs. B: sends down word that

she is "engaged" or "wishes to be excused"--or if she is a Parvenu and

low-bred, she perhaps sends word that she is "not at home."  Very good;

Mrs. A.  drives, on happy and content.  If Mrs. A.'s daughter marries,

or a child is born to the family, Mrs. B. calls, sends in her card with

the upper left hand corner turned down, and then goes along about her

affairs--for that inverted corner means "Congratulations."  If Mrs. B.'s

husband falls downstairs and breaks his neck, Mrs. A. calls, leaves her

card with the upper right hand corner turned down, and then takes her

departure; this corner means "Condolence."  It is very necessary to get

the corners right, else one may unintentionally condole with a friend on

a wedding or congratulate her upon a funeral.  If either lady is about to

leave the city, she goes to the other's house and leaves her card with

"P. P. C." engraved under the name--which signifies, "Pay Parting Call."

But enough of etiquette.  Laura was early instructed in the mysteries of

society life by a competent mentor, and thus was preserved from

troublesome mistakes.



The first fashionable call she received from a member of the ancient

nobility, otherwise the Antiques, was of a pattern with all she received

from that limb of the aristocracy afterward.  This call was paid by Mrs.

Major-General Fulke-Fulkerson and daughter.  They drove up at one in the

afternoon in a rather antiquated vehicle with a faded coat of arms on the

panels, an aged white-wooled negro coachman on the box and a younger

darkey beside him--the footman.  Both of these servants were dressed in

dull brown livery that had seen considerable service.



The ladies entered the drawing-room in full character; that is to say,

with Elizabethan stateliness on the part of the dowager, and an easy

grace and dignity on the part of the young lady that had a nameless

something about it that suggested conscious superiority.  The dresses of

both ladies were exceedingly rich, as to material, but as notably modest

as to color and ornament.  All parties having seated themselves, the

dowager delivered herself of a remark that was not unusual in its form,

and yet it came from her lips with the impressiveness of Scripture:



"The weather has been unpropitious of late, Miss Hawkins."



"It has indeed," said Laura.  "The climate seems to be variable."



"It is its nature of old, here," said the daughter--stating it apparently

as a fact, only, and by her manner waving aside all personal

responsibility on account of it.  "Is it not so, mamma?"



"Quite so, my child.  Do you like winter, Miss Hawkins?"  She said "like"

as if she had, an idea that its dictionary meaning was "approve of."



"Not as well as summer--though I think all seasons have their charms."



"It is a very just remark.  The general held similar views.  He

considered snow in winter proper; sultriness in summer legitimate; frosts

in the autumn the same, and rains in spring not objectionable.  He was

not an exacting man.  And I call to mind now that he always admired

thunder.  You remember, child, your father always admired thunder?"



"He adored it."



"No doubt it reminded him of battle," said Laura.



"Yes, I think perhaps it did.  He had a great respect for Nature.

He often said there was something striking about the ocean.  You remember

his saying that, daughter?"



"Yes, often, Mother.  I remember it very well."



"And hurricanes...  He took a great interest in hurricanes.  And animals.

Dogs, especially--hunting dogs.  Also comets.  I think we all have our

predilections.  I think it is this that gives variety to our tastes."



Laura coincided with this view.



"Do you find it hard and lonely to be so far from your home and friends,

Miss Hawkins?"



"I do find it depressing sometimes, but then there is so much about me

here that is novel and interesting that my days are made up more of

sunshine than shadow."



"Washington is not a dull city in the season," said the young lady.

"We have some very good society indeed, and one need not be at a loss for

means to pass the time pleasantly.  Are you fond of watering-places, Miss

Hawkins?"



"I have really had no experience of them, but I have always felt a strong

desire to see something of fashionable watering-place life."



"We of Washington are unfortunately situated in that respect," said the

dowager.  "It is a tedious distance to Newport.  But there is no help for

it."



Laura said to herself, "Long Branch and Cape May are nearer than Newport;

doubtless these places are low; I'll feel my way a little and see."  Then

she said aloud:



"Why I thought that Long Branch--"



There was no need to "feel" any further--there was that in both faces

before her which made that truth apparent.  The dowager said:



"Nobody goes there, Miss Hawkins--at least only persons of no position in

society.  And the President."  She added that with tranquility.



"Newport is damp, and cold, and windy and excessively disagreeable," said

the daughter, "but it is very select.  One cannot be fastidious about

minor matters when one has no choice."



The visit had spun out nearly three minutes, now.  Both ladies rose with

grave dignity, conferred upon Laura a formal invitation to call, aid then

retired from the conference.  Laura remained in the drawing-room and left

them to pilot themselves out of the house--an inhospitable thing,

it seemed to her, but then she was following her instructions.  She

stood, steeped in reverie, a while, and then she said:



"I think I could always enjoy icebergs--as scenery but not as company."



Still, she knew these two people by reputation, and was aware that they

were not ice-bergs when they were in their own waters and amid their

legitimate surroundings, but on the contrary were people to be respected

for their stainless characters and esteemed for their social virtues and

their benevolent impulses.  She thought it a pity that they had to be

such changed and dreary creatures on occasions of state.



The first call Laura received from the other extremity of the Washington

aristocracy followed close upon the heels of the one we have just been

describing.  The callers this time were the Hon. Mrs. Oliver Higgins,

the Hon. Mrs. Patrique Oreille (pronounced O-relay,) Miss Bridget

(pronounced Breezhay) Oreille, Mrs. Peter Gashly, Miss Gashly, and Miss

Emmeline Gashly.



The three carriages arrived at the same moment from different directions.

They were new and wonderfully shiny, and the brasses on the harness were

highly polished and bore complicated monograms.  There were showy coats

of arms, too, with Latin mottoes.  The coachmen and footmen were clad in

bright new livery, of striking colors, and they had black rosettes with

shaving-brushes projecting above them, on the sides of their stove-pipe

hats.



When the visitors swept into the drawing-room they filled the place with

a suffocating sweetness procured at the perfumer's.  Their costumes,

as to architecture, were the latest fashion intensified; they were

rainbow-hued; they were hung with jewels--chiefly diamonds.  It would

have been plain to any eye that it had cost something to upholster these

women.



The Hon. Mrs. Oliver Higgins was the wife of a delegate from a distant

territory--a gentleman who had kept the principal "saloon," and sold the

best whiskey in the principal village in his wilderness, and so, of

course, was recognized as the first man of his commonwealth and its

fittest representative.



He was a man of paramount influence at home, for he was public spirited,

he was chief of the fire department, he had an admirable command of

profane language, and had killed several "parties."  His shirt fronts

were always immaculate; his boots daintily polished, and no man could

lift a foot and fire a dead shot at a stray speck of dirt on it with a

white handkerchief with a finer grace than he; his watch chain weighed a

pound; the gold in his finger ring was worth forty five dollars; he wore

a diamond cluster-pin and he parted his hair behind.  He had always been,

regarded as the most elegant gentleman in his territory, and it was

conceded by all that no man thereabouts was anywhere near his equal in

the telling of an obscene story except the venerable white-haired

governor himself.  The Hon. Higgins had not come to serve his country in

Washington for nothing.  The appropriation which he had engineered

through Congress for the maintenance, of the Indians in his Territory

would have made all those savages rich if it had ever got to them.



The Hon. Mrs. Higgins was a picturesque woman, and a fluent talker, and

she held a tolerably high station among the Parvenus.  Her English was

fair enough, as a general thing--though, being of New York origin, she

had the fashion peculiar to many natives of that city of pronouncing saw

and law as if they were spelt sawr and lawr.



Petroleum was the agent that had suddenly transformed the Gashlys from

modest hard-working country village folk into "loud" aristocrats and

ornaments of the city.



The Hon. Patrique Oreille was a wealthy Frenchman from Cork.  Not that he

was wealthy when he first came from Cork, but just the reverse.  When he

first landed in New York with his wife, he had only halted at Castle

Garden for a few minutes to receive and exhibit papers showing that he

had resided in this country two years--and then he voted the democratic

ticket and went up town to hunt a house.  He found one and then went to

work as assistant to an architect and builder, carrying a hod all day and

studying politics evenings.  Industry and economy soon enabled him to

start a low rum shop in a foul locality, and this gave him political

influence.  In our country it is always our first care to see that our

people have the opportunity of voting for their choice of men to

represent and govern them--we do not permit our great officials to

appoint the little officials.  We prefer to have so tremendous a power as

that in our own hands.  We hold it safest to elect our judges and

everybody else.  In our cities, the ward meetings elect delegates to the

nominating conventions and instruct them whom to nominate.  The publicans

and their retainers rule the ward meetings (for every body else hates the

worry of politics and stays at home); the delegates from the ward

meetings organize as a nominating convention and make up a list of

candidates--one convention offering a democratic and another a republican

list of incorruptibles; and then the great meek public come forward at

the proper time and make unhampered choice and bless Heaven that they

live in a free land where no form of despotism can ever intrude.



Patrick O'Riley (as his name then stood) created friends and influence

very, fast, for he was always on hand at the police courts to give straw

bail for his customers or establish an alibi for them in case they had

been beating anybody to death on his premises.  Consequently he presently

became a political leader, and was elected to a petty office under the

city government.  Out of a meager salary he soon saved money enough to

open quite a stylish liquor saloon higher up town, with a faro bank

attached and plenty of capital to conduct it with.  This gave him fame

and great respectability.  The position of alderman was forced upon him,

and it was just the same as presenting him a gold mine.  He had fine

horses and carriages, now, and closed up his whiskey mill.



By and by he became a large contractor for city work, and was a bosom

friend of the great and good Wm. M. Weed himself, who had stolen

$20,600,000 from the city and was a man so envied, so honored,--so

adored, indeed, that when the sheriff went to his office to arrest him as

a felon, that sheriff blushed and apologized, and one of the illustrated

papers made a picture of the scene and spoke of the matter in such a way

as to show that the editor regretted that the offense of an arrest had

been offered to so exalted a personage as Mr. Weed.



Mr. O'Riley furnished shingle nails to, the new Court House at three

thousand dollars a keg, and eighteen gross of 60-cent thermometers at

fifteen hundred dollars a dozen; the controller and the board of audit

passed the bills, and a mayor, who was simply ignorant but not criminal,

signed them.  When they were paid, Mr. O'Riley's admirers gave him a

solitaire diamond pin of the size of a filbert, in imitation of the

liberality of Mr. Weed's friends, and then Mr. O'Riley retired from

active service and amused himself with buying real estate at enormous

figures and holding it in other people's names.  By and by the newspapers

came out with exposures and called Weed and O'Riley "thieves,"--whereupon

the people rose as one man (voting repeatedly) and elected the two

gentlemen to their proper theatre of action, the New York legislature.

The newspapers clamored, and the courts proceeded to try the new

legislators for their small irregularities.  Our admirable jury system

enabled the persecuted ex-officials to secure a jury of nine gentlemen

from a neighboring asylum and three graduates from Sing-Sing, and

presently they walked forth with characters vindicated.  The legislature

was called upon to spew them forth--a thing which the legislature

declined to do.  It was like asking children to repudiate their own

father.  It was a legislature of the modern pattern.



Being now wealthy and distinguished, Mr. O'Riley, still bearing the

legislative "Hon." attached to his name (for titles never die in America,

although we do take a republican pride in poking fun at such trifles),

sailed for Europe with his family.  They traveled all about, turning

their noses up at every thing, and not finding it a difficult thing to

do, either, because nature had originally given those features a cast in

that direction; and finally they established themselves in Paris, that

Paradise of Americans of their sort.--They staid there two years and

learned to speak English with a foreign accent--not that it hadn't always

had a foreign accent (which was indeed the case) but now the nature of it

was changed.  Finally they returned home and became ultra fashionables.

They landed here as the Hon.  Patrique Oreille and family, and so are

known unto this day.



Laura provided seats for her visitors and they immediately launched forth

into a breezy, sparkling conversation with that easy confidence which is

to be found only among persons accustomed to high life.



"I've been intending to call sooner, Miss Hawkins," said the Hon. Mrs.

Oreille, "but the weather's been so horrid.  How do you like Washington?"



Laura liked it very well indeed.



Mrs. Gashly--"Is it your first visit?"



Yea, it was her first.



All--"Indeed?"



Mrs. Oreille--"I'm afraid you'll despise the weather, Miss Hawkins.

It's perfectly awful.  It always is.  I tell Mr. Oreille I can't and

I won't put up with any such a climate.  If we were obliged to do it,

I wouldn't mind it; but we are not obliged to, and so I don't see the use

of it.  Sometimes its real pitiful the way the childern pine for Parry

--don't look so sad, Bridget, 'ma chere'--poor child, she can't hear Parry

mentioned without getting the blues."



Mrs. Gashly--"Well I should think so, Mrs. Oreille.  A body lives in

Paris, but a body, only stays here.  I dote on Paris; I'd druther scrimp

along on ten thousand dollars a year there, than suffer and worry here on

a real decent income."



Miss Gashly--"Well then, I wish you'd take us back, mother; I'm sure I

hate this stoopid country enough, even if it is our dear native land."



Miss Emmeline Gashly--"What and leave poor Johnny Peterson behind?" [An

airy genial laugh applauded this sally].



Miss Gashly--"Sister, I should think you'd be ashamed of yourself!"



Miss Emmeline--"Oh, you needn't ruffle your feathers so: I was only

joking.  He don't mean anything by coming to, the house every evening

--only comes to see mother.  Of course that's all!" [General laughter].



Miss G. prettily confused--"Emmeline, how can you!"



Mrs. G.--"Let your sister alone, Emmeline.  I never saw such a tease!"



Mrs. Oreille--"What lovely corals you have, Miss Hawkins!  Just look at

them, Bridget, dear.  I've a great passion for corals--it's a pity

they're getting a little common.  I have some elegant ones--not as

elegant as yours, though--but of course I don't wear them now."



Laura--"I suppose they are rather common, but still I have a great

affection for these, because they were given to me by a dear old friend

of our family named Murphy.  He was a very charming man, but very

eccentric.  We always supposed he was an Irishman, but after be got rich

he went abroad for a year or two, and when he came back you would have

been amused to see how interested he was in a potato.  He asked what it

was!  Now you know that when Providence shapes a mouth especially for the

accommodation of a potato you can detect that fact at a glance when that

mouth is in repose--foreign travel can never remove that sign.  But he

was a very delightful gentleman, and his little foible did not hurt him

at all.  We all have our shams--I suppose there is a sham somewhere about

every individual, if we could manage to ferret it out.  I would so like

to go to France.  I suppose our society here compares very favorably with

French society does it not, Mrs. Oreille?"



Mrs. O.--"Not by any means, Miss Hawkins!  French society is much more

elegant--much more so."



Laura--"I am sorry to hear that.  I suppose ours has deteriorated of

late."



Mrs. O.--"Very much indeed.  There are people in society here that have

really no more money to live on than what some of us pay for servant

hire.  Still I won't say but what some of them are very good people--and

respectable, too."



Laura--"The old families seem to be holding themselves aloof, from what I

hear.  I suppose you seldom meet in society now, the people you used to

be familiar with twelve or fifteen years ago?"



Mrs. O.--"Oh, no-hardly ever."



Mr. O'Riley kept his first rum-mill and protected his customers from the

law in those days, and this turn of the conversation was rather

uncomfortable to madame than otherwise.



Hon. Mrs. Higgins--"Is Francois' health good now, Mrs. Oreille?"



Mrs. O.--(Thankful for the intervention)--"Not very.  A body couldn't

expect it.  He was always delicate--especially his lungs--and this odious

climate tells on him strong, now, after Parry, which is so mild."



Mrs. H:--"I should think so.  Husband says Percy'll die if he don't have

a change; and so I'm going to swap round a little and see what can be

done.  I saw a lady from Florida last week, and she recommended Key West.

I told her Percy couldn't abide winds, as he was threatened with a

pulmonary affection, and then she said try St. Augustine.  It's an awful

distance--ten or twelve hundred mile, they say but then in a case of this

kind--a body can't stand back for trouble, you know."



Mrs. O.--"No, of course that's off.  If Francois don't get better soon

we've got to look out for some other place, or else Europe.  We've

thought some of the Hot Springs, but I don't know.  It's a great

responsibility and a body wants to go cautious.  Is Hildebrand about

again, Mrs. Gashly?"



Mrs. G.--"Yes, but that's about all.  It was indigestion, you know, and

it looks as if it was chronic.  And you know I do dread dyspepsia.  We've

all been worried a good deal about him.  The doctor recommended baked

apple and spoiled meat, and I think it done him good.  It's about the

only thing that will stay on his stomach now-a-days.  We have Dr. Shovel

now.  Who's your doctor, Mrs. Higgins?"



Mrs. H.--"Well, we had Dr. Spooner a good while, but he runs so much to

emetics, which I think are weakening, that we changed off and took Dr.

Leathers.  We like him very much.  He has a fine European reputation,

too.  The first thing he suggested for Percy was to have him taken out in

the back yard for an airing, every afternoon, with nothing at all on."



Mrs. O. and Mrs. G.--"What!"



Mrs. H.--"As true as I'm sitting here.  And it actually helped him for

two or three days; it did indeed.  But after that the doctor said it

seemed to be too severe and so he has fell back on hot foot-baths at

night and cold showers in the morning.  But I don't think there, can be

any good sound help for him in such a climate as this.  I believe we are

going to lose him if we don't make a change."



Mrs. O.  "I suppose you heard of the fright we had two weeks ago last

Saturday?  No?  Why that is strange--but come to remember, you've all

been away to Richmond.  Francois tumbled from the sky light--in the

second-story hall clean down to the first floor--"



Everybody--"Mercy!"



Mrs.  O.--"Yes indeed--and broke two of his ribs--"



Everybody--"What!"



Mrs. O.  "Just as true as you live.  First we thought he must be injured

internally.  It was fifteen minutes past 8 in the evening.  Of course we

were all distracted in a moment--everybody was flying everywhere, and

nobody doing anything worth anything.  By and by I flung out next door

and dragged in Dr. Sprague; President of the Medical University no time

to go for our own doctor of course--and the minute he saw Francois he

said, 'Send for your own physician, madam;' said it as cross as a bear,

too, and turned right on his heel, and cleared out without doing a

thing!"



Everybody--"The mean, contemptible brute!"



Mrs. O--"Well you may say it.  I was nearly out of my wits by this time.

But we hurried off the servants after our own doctor and telegraphed

mother--she was in New York and rushed down on the first train; and when

the doctor got there, lo and behold you he found Francois had broke one

of his legs, too!"



Everybody--"Goodness!"



Mrs. O.--"Yes.  So he set his leg and bandaged it up, and fixed his ribs

and gave him a dose of something to quiet down his excitement and put him

to sleep--poor thing he was trembling and frightened to death and it was

pitiful to see him.  We had him in my bed--Mr. Oreille slept in the guest

room and I laid down beside Francois--but not to sleep bless you no.

Bridget and I set up all night, and the doctor staid till two in the

morning, bless his old heart.--When mother got there she was so used up

with anxiety, that she had to go to bed and have the doctor; but when she

found that Francois was not in immediate danger she rallied, and by night

she was able to take a watch herself.  Well for three days and nights we

three never left that bedside only to take an hour's nap at a time.

And then the doctor said Francois was out of danger and if ever there was

a thankful set, in this world, it was us."



Laura's respect for these, women had augmented during this conversation,

naturally enough; affection and devotion are qualities that are able to

adorn and render beautiful a character that is otherwise unattractive,

and even repulsive.



Mrs. Gashly--"I do believe I would a died if I had been in your place,

Mrs. Oreille.  The time Hildebrand was so low with the pneumonia Emmeline

and me were all, alone with him most of the time and we never took a

minute's sleep for as much as two days, and nights.  It was at Newport

and we wouldn't trust hired nurses.  One afternoon he had a fit, and

jumped up and run out on the portico of the hotel with nothing in the

world on and the wind a blowing liken ice and we after him scared to

death; and when the ladies and gentlemen saw that he had a fit, every

lady scattered for her room and not a gentleman lifted his hand to help,

the wretches!  Well after that his life hung by a thread for as much as

ten days, and the minute he was out of danger Emmeline and me just went

to bed sick and worn out.  I never want to pass through such a time

again.  Poor dear Francois--which leg did he break, Mrs. Oreille!"



Mrs. O.--"It was his right hand hind leg.  Jump down, Francois dear, and

show the ladies what a cruel limp you've got yet."



Francois demurred, but being coaxed and delivered gently upon the floor,

he performed very satisfactorily, with his "right hand hind leg" in the

air.  All were affected--even Laura--but hers was an affection of the

stomach.  The country-bred girl had not suspected that the little whining

ten-ounce black and tan reptile, clad in a red embroidered pigmy blanket

and reposing in Mrs. Oreille's lap all through the visit was the

individual whose sufferings had been stirring the dormant generosities of

her nature.  She said:



"Poor little creature!  You might have lost him!"



Mrs. O.--"O pray don't mention it, Miss Hawkins--it gives me such a

turn!"



Laura--"And Hildebrand and Percy--are they-are they like this one?"



Mrs. G.--"No, Hilly has considerable Skye blood in him, I believe."



Mrs. H.--"Percy's the same, only he is two months and ten days older and

has his ears cropped.  His father, Martin Farquhar Tupper, was sickly,

and died young, but he was the sweetest disposition.--His mother had

heart disease but was very gentle and resigned, and a wonderful ratter."

--[** As impossible and exasperating as this conversation may sound to a

person who is not an idiot, it is scarcely in any respect an exaggeration

of one which one of us actually listened to in an American drawing room

--otherwise we could not venture to put such a chapter into a book which,

professes to deal with social possibilities.--THE AUTHORS.]



So carried away had the visitors become by their interest attaching to

this discussion of family matters, that their stay had been prolonged to

a very improper and unfashionable length; but they suddenly recollected

themselves now and took their departure.



Laura's scorn was boundless.  The more she thought of these people and

their extraordinary talk, the more offensive they seemed to her; and yet

she confessed that if one must choose between the two extreme

aristocracies it might be best, on the whole, looking at things from a

strictly business point of view, to herd with the Parvenus; she was in

Washington solely to compass a certain matter and to do it at any cost,

and these people might be useful to her, while it was plain that her

purposes and her schemes for pushing them would not find favor in the

eyes of the Antiques.  If it came to choice--and it might come to that,

sooner or later--she believed she could come to a decision without much

difficulty or many pangs.



But the best aristocracy of the three Washington castes, and really the

most powerful, by far, was that of the Middle Ground: It was made up of

the families of public men from nearly every state in the Union--men who

held positions in both the executive and legislative branches of the

government, and whose characters had been for years blemishless, both at

home and at the capital.  These gentlemen and their households were

unostentatious people; they were educated and refined; they troubled

themselves but little about the two other orders of nobility, but moved

serenely in their wide orbit, confident in their own strength and well

aware of the potency of their influence.  They had no troublesome

appearances to keep up, no rivalries which they cared to distress

themselves about, no jealousies to fret over.  They could afford to mind

their own affairs and leave other combinations to do the same or do

otherwise, just as they chose.  They were people who were beyond

reproach, and that was sufficient.



Senator Dilworthy never came into collision with any of these factions.

He labored for them all and with them all.  He said that all men were

brethren and all were entitled to the honest unselfish help and

countenance of a Christian laborer in the public vineyard.



Laura concluded, after reflection, to let circumstances determine the

course it might be best for her to pursue as regarded the several

aristocracies.



Now it might occur to the reader that perhaps Laura had been somewhat

rudely suggestive in her remarks to Mrs. Oreille when the subject of

corals was under discussion, but it did not occur to Laura herself.

She was not a person of exaggerated refinement; indeed, the society and

the influences that had formed her character had not been of a nature

calculated to make her so; she thought that "give and take was fair

play," and that to parry an offensive thrust with a sarcasm was a neat

and legitimate thing to do.  She some times talked to people in a way

which some ladies would consider, actually shocking; but Laura rather

prided herself upon some of her exploits of that character.  We are sorry

we cannot make her a faultless heroine; but we cannot, for the reason

that she was human.



She considered herself a superior conversationist.  Long ago, when the

possibility had first been brought before her mind that some day she

might move in Washington society, she had recognized the fact that

practiced conversational powers would be a necessary weapon in that

field; she had also recognized the fact that since her dealings there

must be mainly with men, and men whom she supposed to be exceptionally

cultivated and able, she would need heavier shot in her magazine than

mere brilliant "society" nothings; whereupon she had at once entered upon

a tireless and elaborate course of reading, and had never since ceased to

devote every unoccupied moment to this sort of preparation.  Having now

acquired a happy smattering of various information, she used it with good

effect--she passed for a singularly well informed woman in Washington.

The quality of her literary tastes had necessarily undergone constant

improvement under this regimen, and as necessarily, also; the duality of

her language had improved, though it cannot be denied that now and then

her former condition of life betrayed itself in just perceptible

inelegancies of expression and lapses of grammar.









CHAPTER XXXIV.



When Laura had been in Washington three months, she was still the same

person, in one respect, that she was when she first arrived there--that

is to say, she still bore the name of Laura Hawkins.  Otherwise she was

perceptibly changed.--



She had arrived in a state of grievous uncertainty as to what manner of

woman she was, physically and intellectually, as compared with eastern

women; she was well satisfied, now, that her beauty was confessed, her

mind a grade above the average, and her powers of fascination rather

extraordinary.  So she, was at ease upon those points.  When she arrived,

she was possessed of habits of economy and not possessed of money; now

she dressed elaborately, gave but little thought to the cost of things,

and was very well fortified financially.  She kept her mother and

Washington freely supplied with money, and did the same by Col. Sellers

--who always insisted upon giving his note for loans--with interest; he was

rigid upon that; she must take interest; and one of the Colonel's

greatest satisfactions was to go over his accounts and note what a

handsome sum this accruing interest amounted to, and what a comfortable

though modest support it would yield Laura in case reverses should

overtake her.



In truth he could not help feeling that he was an efficient shield for

her against poverty; and so, if her expensive ways ever troubled him for

a brief moment, he presently dismissed the thought and said to himself,

"Let her go on--even if she loses everything she is still safe--this

interest will always afford her a good easy income."



Laura was on excellent terms with a great many members of Congress, and

there was an undercurrent of suspicion in some quarters that she was one

of that detested class known as "lobbyists;" but what belle could escape

slander in such a city?  Fairminded people declined to condemn her on

mere suspicion, and so the injurious talk made no very damaging headway.

She was very gay, now, and very celebrated, and she might well expect to

be assailed by many kinds of gossip.  She was growing used to celebrity,

and could already sit calm and seemingly unconscious, under the fire of

fifty lorgnettes in a theatre, or even overhear the low voice "That's

she!" as she passed along the street without betraying annoyance.



The whole air was full of a vague vast scheme which was to eventuate in

filling Laura's pockets with millions of money; some had one idea of the

scheme, and some another, but nobody had any exact knowledge upon the

subject.  All that any one felt sure about, was that Laura's landed

estates were princely in value and extent, and that the government was

anxious to get hold of them for public purposes, and that Laura was

willing to make the sale but not at all anxious about the matter and not

at all in a hurry.  It was whispered that Senator Dilworthy was a

stumbling block in the way of an immediate sale, because he was resolved

that the government should not have the lands except with the

understanding that they should be devoted to the uplifting of the negro

race; Laura did not care what they were devoted to, it was said, (a world

of very different gossip to the contrary notwithstanding,) but there were

several other heirs and they would be guided entirely by the Senator's

wishes; and finally, many people averred that while it would be easy to

sell the lands to the government for the benefit of the negro, by

resorting to the usual methods of influencing votes, Senator Dilworthy

was unwilling to have so noble a charity sullied by any taint of

corruption--he was resolved that not a vote should be bought.  Nobody

could get anything definite from Laura about these matters, and so gossip

had to feed itself chiefly upon guesses.  But the effect of it all was,

that Laura was considered to be very wealthy and likely to be vastly more

so in a little while.  Consequently she was much courted and as much

envied: Her wealth attracted many suitors.  Perhaps they came to worship

her riches, but they remained to worship her.  Some of the noblest men of

the time succumbed to her fascinations.  She frowned upon no lover when

he made his first advances, but by and by when she was hopelessly

enthralled, he learned from her own lips that she had formed a resolution

never to marry.  Then he would go away hating and cursing the whole sex,

and she would calmly add his scalp to her string, while she mused upon

the bitter day that Col. Selby trampled her love and her pride in the

dust.  In time it came to be said that her way was paved with broken

hearts.



Poor Washington gradually woke up to the fact that he too was an

intellectual marvel as well as his gifted sister.  He could not conceive

how it had come about (it did not occur to him that the gossip about his

family's great wealth had any thing to do with it). He could not account

for it by any process of reasoning, and was simply obliged to accept the

fact and give up trying to solve the riddle.  He found himself dragged

into society and courted, wondered at and envied very much as if he were

one of those foreign barbers who flit over here now and then with a

self-conferred title of nobility and marry some rich fool's absurd

daughter. Sometimes at a dinner party or a reception he would find

himself the centre of interest, and feel unutterably uncomfortable in the

discovery. Being obliged to say something, he would mine his brain and

put in a blast and when the smoke and flying debris had cleared away the

result would be what seemed to him but a poor little intellectual clod of

dirt or two, and then he would be astonished to see everybody as lost in

admiration as if he had brought up a ton or two of virgin gold.  Every

remark he made delighted his hearers and compelled their applause; he

overheard people say he was exceedingly bright--they were chiefly mammas

and marriageable young ladies.  He found that some of his good things

were being repeated about the town.  Whenever he heard of an instance of

this kind, he would keep that particular remark in mind and analyze it at

home in private.  At first he could not see that the remark was anything

better than a parrot might originate; but by and by he began to feel that

perhaps he underrated his powers; and after that he used to analyze his

good things with a deal of comfort, and find in them a brilliancy which

would have been unapparent to him in earlier days--and then he would make

a note, of that good thing and say it again the first time he found

himself in a new company.  Presently he had saved up quite a repertoire

of brilliancies; and after that he confined himself to repeating these

and ceased to originate any more, lest he might injure his reputation by

an unlucky effort.



He was constantly having young ladies thrust upon his notice at

receptions, or left upon his hands at parties, and in time he began to

feel that he was being deliberately persecuted in this way; and after

that he could not enjoy society because of his constant dread of these

female ambushes and surprises.  He was distressed to find that nearly

every time he showed a young lady a polite attention he was straightway

reported to be engaged to her; and as some of these reports got into the

newspapers occasionally, he had to keep writing to Louise that they were

lies and she must believe in him and not mind them or allow them to

grieve her.



Washington was as much in the dark as anybody with regard to the great

wealth that was hovering in the air and seemingly on the point of

tumbling into the family pocket.  Laura would give him no satisfaction.

All she would say, was:



"Wait.  Be patient.  You will see."



"But will it be soon, Laura?"



"It will not be very long, I think."



"But what makes you think so?"



"I have reasons--and good ones.  Just wait, and be patient."



"But is it going to be as much as people say it is?"



"What do they say it is?"



"Oh, ever so much.  Millions!"



"Yes, it will be a great sum."



"But how great, Laura?  Will it be millions?"



"Yes, you may call it that.  Yes, it will be millions.  There, now--does

that satisfy you?"



"Splendid!  I can wait.  I can wait patiently--ever so patiently.  Once I

was near selling the land for twenty thousand dollars; once for thirty

thousand dollars; once after that for seven thousand dollars; and once

for forty thousand dollars--but something always told me not to do it.

What a fool I would have been to sell it for such a beggarly trifle!  It

is the land that's to bring the money, isn't it Laura?  You can tell me

that much, can't you?"



"Yes, I don't mind saying that much.  It is the land.



"But mind--don't ever hint that you got it from me.  Don't mention me in

the matter at all, Washington."



"All right--I won't.  Millions!  Isn't it splendid!  I mean to look

around for a building lot; a lot with fine ornamental shrubbery and all

that sort of thing.  I will do it to-day.  And I might as well see an

architect, too, and get him to go to work at a plan for a house.  I don't

intend to spare and expense; I mean to have the noblest house that money

can build."  Then after a pause--he did not notice Laura's smiles "Laura,

would you lay the main hall in encaustic tiles, or just in fancy patterns

of hard wood?"



Laura laughed a good old-fashioned laugh that had more of her former

natural self about it than any sound that had issued from her mouth in

many weeks.  She said:



"You don't change, Washington.  You still begin to squander a fortune

right and left the instant you hear of it in the distance; you never wait

till the foremost dollar of it arrives within a hundred miles of you,"

--and she kissed her brother good bye and left him weltering in his dreams,

so to speak.



He got up and walked the floor feverishly during two hours; and when he

sat down he had married Louise, built a house, reared a family, married

them off, spent upwards of eight hundred thousand dollars on mere

luxuries, and died worth twelve millions.









CHAPTER XXXV.





Laura went down stairs, knocked at/the study door, and entered, scarcely

waiting for the response.  Senator Dilworthy was alone--with an open

Bible in his hand, upside down.  Laura smiled, and said, forgetting her

acquired correctness of speech,



"It is only me."



"Ah, come in, sit down," and the Senator closed the book and laid it

down.  "I wanted to see you.  Time to report progress from the committee

of the whole," and the Senator beamed with his own congressional wit.



"In the committee of the whole things are working very well.  We have

made ever so much progress in a week.  I believe that you and I together

could run this government beautifully, uncle."



The Senator beamed again.  He liked to be called "uncle" by this

beautiful woman.



"Did you see Hopperson last night after the congressional prayer

meeting?"



"Yes.  He came.  He's a kind of--"



"Eh? he is one of my friends, Laura.  He's a fine man, a very fine man.

I don't know any man in congress I'd sooner go to for help in any

Christian work.  What did he say?"



"Oh, he beat around a little.  He said he should like to help the negro,

his heart went out to the negro, and all that--plenty of them say that

but he was a little afraid of the Tennessee Land bill; if Senator

Dilworthy wasn't in it, he should suspect there was a fraud on the

government."



"He said that, did he?"



"Yes.  And he said he felt he couldn't vote for it.  He was shy."



"Not shy, child, cautious.  He's a very cautious man.  I have been with

him a great deal on conference committees.  He wants reasons, good ones.

Didn't you show him he was in error about the bill?"



"I did.  I went over the whole thing.  I had to tell him some of the side

arrangements, some of the--"



"You didn't mention me?"



"Oh, no.  I told him you were daft about the negro and the philanthropy

part of it, as you are."



"Daft is a little strong, Laura.  But you know that I wouldn't touch this

bill if it were not for the public good, and for the good of the colored

race; much as I am interested in the heirs of this property, and would

like to have them succeed."



Laura looked a little incredulous, and the Senator proceeded.



"Don't misunderstand me, I don't deny that it is for the interest of all

of us that this bill should go through, and it will.  I have no

concealments from you.  But I have one principle in my public life, which

I should like you to keep in mind; it has always been my guide.  I never

push a private interest if it is not Justified and ennobled by some

larger public good.  I doubt Christian would be justified in working for

his own salvation if it was not to aid in the salvation of his fellow

men."



The Senator spoke with feeling, and then added,



"I hope you showed Hopperson that our motives were pure?"



"Yes, and he seemed to have a new light on the measure: I think will vote

for it."



"I hope so; his name will give tone and strength to it.  I knew you would

only have to show him that it was just and pure, in order to secure his

cordial support."



"I think I convinced him.  Yes, I am perfectly sure he will vote right

now."



"That's good, that's good," said the Senator; smiling, and rubbing his

hands.  "Is there anything more?"



"You'll find some changes in that I guess," handing the Senator a printed

list of names.  "Those checked off are all right."



"Ah--'m--'m," running his eye down the list.  "That's encouraging.  What

is the 'C' before some of the names, and the 'B. B.'?"



"Those are my private marks.  That 'C' stands for 'convinced,' with

argument.  The 'B. B.' is a general sign for a relative.  You see it

stands before three of the Hon. Committee.  I expect to see the chairman

of the committee to-day, Mr. Buckstone."



"So, you must, he ought to be seen without any delay.  Buckstone is a

worldly sort of a fellow, but he has charitable impulses.  If we secure

him we shall have a favorable report by the committee, and it will be a

great thing to be able to state that fact quietly where it will do good."



"Oh, I saw Senator Balloon"



"He will help us, I suppose?  Balloon is a whole-hearted fellow.  I can't

help loving that man, for all his drollery and waggishness.  He puts on

an air of levity sometimes, but there aint a man in the senate knows the

scriptures as he does.  He did not make any objections?"



"Not exactly, he said--shall I tell you what he said?" asked Laura

glancing furtively at him.



"Certainly."



"He said he had no doubt it was a good thing; if Senator Dilworthy was in

it, it would pay to look into it."



The Senator laughed, but rather feebly, and said, "Balloon is always full

of his jokes."



"I explained it to him.  He said it was all right, he only wanted a word

with you,", continued Laura.  "He is a handsome old gentleman, and he is

gallant for an old man."



"My daughter," said the Senator, with a grave look, "I trust there was

nothing free in his manner?"



"Free?" repeated Laura, with indignation in her face.  "With me!"



"There, there, child.  I meant nothing, Balloon talks a little freely

sometimes, with men.  But he is right at heart.  His term expires next

year and I fear we shall lose him."



"He seemed to be packing the day I was there.  His rooms were full of dry

goods boxes, into which his servant was crowding all manner of old

clothes and stuff: I suppose he will paint 'Pub. Docs' on them and frank

them home.  That's good economy, isn't it?"



"Yes, yes, but child, all Congressmen do that.  It may not be strictly

honest, indeed it is not unless he had some public documents mixed in

with the clothes."



"It's a funny world.  Good-bye, uncle.  I'm going to see that chairman."



And humming a cheery opera air, she departed to her room to dress for

going out.  Before she did that, however, she took out her note book and

was soon deep in its contents; marking, dashing, erasing, figuring, and

talking to herself.



"Free!  I wonder what Dilworthy does think of me anyway?  One .  .  .

two.  .  .eight .  .  .  seventeen .  .  .  twenty-one,.  .  'm'm .  .  .

it takes a heap for a majority.  Wouldn't Dilworthy open his eyes if he

knew some of the things Balloon did say to me.  There.  .  .  .

Hopperson's influence ought to count twenty .  .  .  the sanctimonious

old curmudgeon.  Son-in-law.  .  .  . sinecure in the negro institution

.  .  .  .That about gauges him .  .  . The three committeemen .  .  .  .

sons-in-law.  Nothing like a son-in-law here in Washington or a brother-

in-law .  .  . And everybody has 'em .  .  .  Let's see: .  .  .  sixty-

one.  .  .  .  with places .  .  .  twenty-five .  .  .  persuaded--it is

getting on; .  .  .  . we'll have two-thirds of Congress in time .  .  .

Dilworthy must surely know I understand him.  Uncle Dilworthy .  .  .  .

Uncle Balloon!--Tells very amusing stories .  .  .  when ladies are not

present .  .  . I should think so .  .  .  .'m .  .  .  'm.  Eighty-five.

There.  I must find that chairman.  Queer.  .  .  .  Buckstone acts .  .

Seemed to be in love .  .  .  .  .  I was sure of it.  He promised to

come here.  .  . and he hasn't.  .  . Strange.  Very strange .  .  .  .

I must chance to meet him to-day."



Laura dressed and went out, thinking she was perhaps too early for Mr.

Buckstone to come from the house, but as he lodged near the bookstore she

would drop in there and keep a look out for him.



While Laura is on her errand to find Mr. Buckstone, it may not be out of

the way to remark that she knew quite as much of Washington life as

Senator Dilworthy gave her credit for, and more than she thought proper

to tell him.  She was acquainted by this time with a good many of the

young fellows of Newspaper Row; and exchanged gossip with them to their

mutual advantage.



They were always talking in the Row, everlastingly gossiping, bantering

and sarcastically praising things, and going on in a style which was a

curious commingling of earnest and persiflage.  Col. Sellers liked this

talk amazingly, though he was sometimes a little at sea in it--and

perhaps that didn't lessen the relish of the conversation to the

correspondents.



It seems that they had got hold of the dry-goods box packing story about

Balloon, one day, and were talking it over when the Colonel came in.

The Colonel wanted to know all about it, and Hicks told him.  And then

Hicks went on, with a serious air,



"Colonel, if you register a letter, it means that it is of value, doesn't

it?  And if you pay fifteen cents for registering it, the government will

have to take extra care of it and even pay you back its full value if it

is lost.  Isn't that so?"



"Yes.  I suppose it's so.".



"Well Senator Balloon put fifteen cents worth of stamps on each of those

seven huge boxes of old clothes, and shipped that ton of second-hand

rubbish, old boots and pantaloons and what not through the mails as

registered matter!  It was an ingenious thing and it had a genuine touch

of humor about it, too.  I think there is more real: talent among our

public men of to-day than there was among those of old times--a far more

fertile fancy, a much happier ingenuity.  Now, Colonel, can you picture

Jefferson, or Washington or John Adams franking their wardrobes through

the mails and adding the facetious idea of making the government

responsible for the cargo for the sum of one dollar and five cents?

Statesmen were dull creatures in those days.  I have a much greater

admiration for Senator Balloon."



"Yes, Balloon is a man of parts, there is no denying it"



"I think so.  He is spoken of for the post of Minister to China, or

Austria, and I hope will be appointed.  What we want abroad is good

examples of the national character.



"John Jay and Benjamin Franklin were well enough in their day, but the

nation has made progress since then.  Balloon is a man we know and can

depend on to be true to himself."



"Yes, and Balloon has had a good deal of public experience.  He is an old

friend of mine.  He was governor of one of the territories a while, and

was very satisfactory."



"Indeed he was.  He was ex-officio Indian agent, too.  Many a man would

have taken the Indian appropriation and devoted the money to feeding and

clothing the helpless savages, whose land had been taken from them by the

white man in the interests of civilization; but Balloon knew their needs

better.  He built a government saw-mill on the reservation with the

money, and the lumber sold for enormous prices--a relative of his did all

the work free of charge--that is to say he charged nothing more than the

lumber world bring."  "But the poor Injuns--not that I care much for

Injuns--what did he do for them?"



"Gave them the outside slabs to fence in the reservation with.  Governor

Balloon was nothing less than a father to the poor Indians.  But Balloon

is not alone, we have many truly noble statesmen in our country's service

like Balloon.  The Senate is full of them.  Don't you think so Colonel?"



"Well, I dunno.  I honor my country's public servants as much as any one

can.  I meet them, Sir, every day, and the more I see of them the more I

esteem them and the more grateful I am that our institutions give us the

opportunity of securing their services.  Few lands are so blest."



"That is true, Colonel.  To be sure you can buy now and then a Senator or

a Representative but they do not know it is wrong, and so they are not

ashamed of it.  They are gentle, and confiding and childlike, and in my

opinion these are qualities that ennoble them far more than any amount of

sinful sagacity could.  I quite agree with you, Col. Sellers."



"Well"--hesitated the, Colonel--"I am afraid some of them do buy their

seats--yes, I am afraid they do--but as Senator Dilworthy himself said to

me, it is sinful,--it is very wrong--it is shameful; Heaven protect me

from such a charge.  That is what Dilworthy said.  And yet when you come

to look at it you cannot deny that we would have to go without the

services of some of our ablest men, sir, if the country were opposed to

--to--bribery.  It is a harsh term.  I do not like to use it."



The Colonel interrupted himself at this point to meet an engagement with

the Austrian minister, and took his leave with his usual courtly bow.









CHAPTER XXXVI.





In due time Laura alighted at the book store, and began to look at the

titles of the handsome array of books on the counter.  A dapper clerk of

perhaps nineteen or twenty years, with hair accurately parted and

surprisingly slick, came bustling up and leaned over with a pretty smile

and an affable--



"Can I--was there any particular book you wished to see?"



"Have you Taine's England?"



"Beg pardon?"



"Taine's Notes on England."



The young gentleman scratched the side of his nose with a cedar pencil

which he took down from its bracket on the side of his head, and

reflected a moment:



"Ah--I see," [with a bright smile]--"Train, you mean--not Taine.  George

Francis Train.  No, ma'm we--"



"I mean Taine--if I may take the liberty."



The clerk reflected again--then:



"Taine .  .  .  .  Taine .  .  .  . Is it hymns?"



"No, it isn't hymns.  It is a volume that is making a deal of talk just

now, and is very widely known--except among parties who sell it."



The clerk glanced at her face to see if a sarcasm might not lurk

somewhere in that obscure speech, but the gentle simplicity of the

beautiful eyes that met his, banished that suspicion.  He went away and

conferred with the proprietor.  Both appeared to be non-plussed.  They

thought and talked, and talked and thought by turns.  Then both came

forward and the proprietor said:



"Is it an American book, ma'm?"



"No, it is an American reprint of an English translation."



"Oh!  Yes--yes--I remember, now.  We are expecting it every day.  It

isn't out yet."



"I think you must be mistaken, because you advertised it a week ago."



"Why no--can that be so?"



"Yes, I am sure of it.  And besides, here is the book itself, on the

counter."



She bought it and the proprietor retired from the field.  Then she asked

the clerk for the Autocrat of the Breakfast Table--and was pained to see

the admiration her beauty had inspired in him fade out of his face.

He said with cold dignity, that cook books were somewhat out of their

line, but he would order it if she desired it.  She said, no, never mind.

Then she fell to conning the titles again, finding a delight in the

inspection of the Hawthornes, the Longfellows, the Tennysons, and other

favorites of her idle hours.  Meantime the clerk's eyes were busy, and no

doubt his admiration was returning again--or may be he was only gauging

her probable literary tastes by some sagacious system of admeasurement

only known to his guild.  Now he began to "assist" her in making a

selection; but his efforts met with no success--indeed they only annoyed

her and unpleasantly interrupted her meditations.  Presently, while she

was holding a copy of "Venetian Life" in her hand and running over a

familiar passage here and there, the clerk said, briskly, snatching up a

paper-covered volume and striking the counter a smart blow with it to

dislodge the dust:



"Now here is a work that we've sold a lot of.  Everybody that's read it

likes it"--and he intruded it under her nose; "it's a book that I can

recommend--'The Pirate's Doom, or the Last of the Buccaneers.'  I think

it's one of the best things that's come out this season."



Laura pushed it gently aside her hand and went on and went on filching

from "Venetian Life."



"I believe I do not want it," she said.



The clerk hunted around awhile, glancing at one title and then another,

but apparently not finding what he wanted.



However, he succeeded at last.  Said he:



"Have you ever read this, ma'm?  I am sure you'll like it.  It's by the

author of 'The Hooligans of Hackensack.' It is full of love troubles and

mysteries and all sorts of such things.  The heroine strangles her own

mother.  Just glance at the title please,--'Gonderil the Vampire, or The

Dance of Death.'  And here is 'The Jokist's Own Treasury, or, The Phunny

Phellow's Bosom Phriend.'  The funniest thing!--I've read it four times,

ma'm, and I can laugh at the very sight of it yet.  And 'Gonderil,'

--I assure you it is the most splendid book I ever read.  I know you will

like these books, ma'm, because I've read them myself and I know what

they are."



"Oh, I was perplexed--but I see how it is, now.  You must have thought

I asked you to tell me what sort of books I wanted--for I am apt to say

things which I don't really mean, when I am absent minded.  I suppose I

did ask you, didn't I?"



"No ma'm,--but I--"



"Yes, I must have done it, else you would not have offered your services,

for fear it might be rude.  But don't be troubled--it was all my fault.

I ought not to have been so heedless--I ought not to have asked you."



"But you didn't ask me, ma'm.  We always help customers all we can.

You see our experience--living right among books all the time--that sort

of thing makes us able to help a customer make a selection, you know."



"Now does it, indeed?  It is part of your business, then?"



"Yes'm, we always help."



"How good it is of you.  Some people would think it rather obtrusive,

perhaps, but I don't--I think it is real kindness--even charity.  Some

people jump to conclusions without any thought--you have noticed that?"



"O yes," said the clerk, a little perplexed as to whether to feel

comfortable or the reverse; "Oh yes, indeed, I've often noticed that,

ma'm."



"Yes, they jump to conclusions with an absurd heedlessness.  Now some

people would think it odd that because you, with the budding tastes and

the innocent enthusiasms natural to your time of life, enjoyed the

Vampires and the volume of nursery jokes, you should imagine that an

older person would delight in them too--but I do not think it odd at all.

I think it natural--perfectly natural in you.  And kind, too.  You look

like a person who not only finds a deep pleasure in any little thing in

the way of literature that strikes you forcibly, but is willing and glad

to share that pleasure with others--and that, I think, is noble and

admirable--very noble and admirable.  I think we ought all--to share our

pleasures with others, and do what we can to make each other happy, do

not you?"



"Oh, yes.  Oh, yes, indeed.  Yes, you are quite right, ma'm."



But he was getting unmistakably uncomfortable, now, notwithstanding

Laura's confiding sociability and almost affectionate tone.



"Yes, indeed.  Many people would think that what a bookseller--or perhaps

his clerk--knows about literature as literature, in contradistinction to

its character as merchandise, would hardly, be of much assistance to a

person--that is, to an adult, of course--in the selection of food for the

mind--except of course wrapping paper, or twine, or wafers, or something

like that--but I never feel that way.  I feel that whatever service you

offer me, you offer with a good heart, and I am as grateful for it as if

it were the greatest boon to me.  And it is useful to me--it is bound to

be so.  It cannot be otherwise.  If you show me a book which you have

read--not skimmed over or merely glanced at, but read--and you tell me

that you enjoyed it and that you could read it three or four times, then

I know what book I want--"



"Thank you!--th--"



--"to avoid.  Yes indeed.  I think that no information ever comes amiss

in this world.  Once or twice I have traveled in the cars--and there you

know, the peanut boy always measures you with his eye, and hands you out

a book of murders if you are fond of theology; or Tupper or a dictionary

or T. S. Arthur if you are fond of poetry; or he hands you a volume of

distressing jokes or a copy of the American Miscellany if you

particularly dislike that sort of literary fatty degeneration of the

heart--just for the world like a pleasant spoken well-meaning gentleman

in any, bookstore.  But here I am running on as if business men had

nothing to do but listen to women talk.  You must pardon me, for I was

not thinking.--And you must let me thank you again for helping me.

I read a good deal, and shall be in nearly every day and I would be sorry

to have you think me a customer who talks too much and buys too little.

Might I ask you to give me the time?  Ah-two-twenty-two.  Thank you

very much.  I will set mine while I have the opportunity."



But she could not get her watch open, apparently.  She tried, and tried

again.  Then the clerk, trembling at his own audacity, begged to be

allowed to assist.  She allowed him.  He succeeded, and was radiant under

the sweet influences of her pleased face and her seductively worded

acknowledgements with gratification.  Then he gave her the exact time

again, and anxiously watched her turn the hands slowly till they reached

the precise spot without accident or loss of life, and then he looked as

happy as a man who had helped a fellow being through a momentous

undertaking, and was grateful to know that he had not lived in vain.

Laura thanked him once more.  The words were music to his ear; but what

were they compared to the ravishing smile with which she flooded his

whole system?  When she bowed her adieu and turned away, he was no longer

suffering torture in the pillory where she had had him trussed up during

so many distressing moments, but he belonged to the list of her conquests

and was a flattered and happy thrall, with the dawn-light of love

breaking over the eastern elevations of his heart.



It was about the hour, now, for the chairman of the House Committee on

Benevolent Appropriations to make his appearance, and Laura stepped to

the door to reconnoiter.  She glanced up the street, and sure enough--







CHAPTER XXXVII.





That Chairman was nowhere in sight.  Such disappointments seldom occur in

novels, but are always happening in real life.



She was obliged to make a new plan.  She sent him a note, and asked him

to call in the evening--which he did.



She received the Hon. Mr. Buckstone with a sunny smile, and said:



"I don't know how I ever dared to send you a note, Mr. Buckstone, for you

have the reputation of not being very partial to our sex."



"Why I am sure my, reputation does me wrong, then, Miss Hawkins.  I have

been married once--is that nothing in my favor?"



"Oh, yes--that is, it may be and it may not be.  If you have known what

perfection is in woman, it is fair to argue that inferiority cannot

interest you now."



"Even if that were the case it could not affect you, Miss Hawkins," said

the chairman gallantly.  "Fame does not place you in the list of ladies

who rank below perfection."  This happy speech delighted Mr. Buckstone as

much as it seemed to delight Laura.  But it did not confuse him as much

as it apparently did her.



"I wish in all sincerity that I could be worthy of such a felicitous

compliment as that.  But I am a woman, and so I am gratified for it just

as it is, and would not have it altered."



"But it is not merely a compliment--that is, an empty complement--it is

the truth.  All men will endorse that."



Laura looked pleased, and said:



"It is very kind of you to say it.  It is a distinction indeed, for a

country-bred girl like me to be so spoken of by people of brains and

culture.  You are so kind that I know you will pardon my putting you to

the trouble to come this evening."



"Indeed it was no trouble.  It was a pleasure.  I am alone in the world

since I lost my wife, and I often long for the society of your sex, Miss

Hawkins, notwithstanding what people may say to the contrary."



"It is pleasant to hear you say that.  I am sure it must be so.  If I

feel lonely at times, because of my exile from old friends, although

surrounded by new ones who are already very dear to me, how much more

lonely must you feel, bereft as you are, and with no wholesome relief

from the cares of state that weigh you down.  For your own sake, as well

as for the sake of others, you ought to go into society oftener.

I seldom see you at a reception, and when I do you do not usually give me

very, much of your attention"



"I never imagined that you wished it or I would have been very glad to

make myself happy in that way.--But one seldom gets an opportunity to say

more than a sentence to you in a place like that.  You are always the

centre of a group--a fact which you may have noticed yourself.  But if

one might come here--"



"Indeed you would always find a hearty welcome, Mr. Buckstone.  I have

often wished you would come and tell me more about Cairo and the

Pyramids, as you once promised me you would."



"Why, do you remember that yet, Miss Hawkins?  I thought ladies' memories

were more fickle than that."



"Oh, they are not so fickle as gentlemen's promises.  And besides, if I

had been inclined to forget, I--did you not give me something by way of a

remembrancer?"



"Did I?"



"Think."



"It does seem to me that I did; but I have forgotten what it was now."



"Never, never call a lady's memory fickle again!  Do you recognize this?"



"A little spray of box!  I am beaten--I surrender.  But have you kept

that all this time?"



Laura's confusion was very, pretty.  She tried to hide it, but the more

she tried the more manifest it became and withal the more captivating to

look upon.  Presently she threw the spray of box from her with an annoyed

air, and said:



"I forgot myself.  I have been very foolish.  I beg that you will forget

this absurd thing."



Mr. Buckstone picked up the spray, and sitting down by Laura's side on

the sofa, said:



"Please let me keep it, Miss Hawkins.  I set a very high value upon it

now."



"Give it to me, Mr. Buckstone, and do not speak so.  I have been

sufficiently punished for my thoughtlessness.  You cannot take pleasure

in adding to my distress.  Please give it to me."



"Indeed I do not wish to distress you.  But do not consider the matter so

gravely; you have done yourself no wrong.  You probably forgot that you

had it; but if you had given it to me I would have kept it--and not

forgotten it."



"Do not talk so, Mr. Buckstone.  Give it to me, please, and forget the

matter."



"It would not be kind to refuse, since it troubles you so, and so I

restore it.  But if you would give me part of it and keep the rest--"



"So that you might have something to remind you of me when you wished to

laugh at my foolishness?"



"Oh, by no means, no!  Simply that I might remember that I had once

assisted to discomfort you, and be reminded to do so no more."



Laura looked up, and scanned his face a moment.  She was about to break

the twig, but she hesitated and said:



"If I were sure that you--"  She threw the spray away, and continued:

"This is silly!  We will change the subject.  No, do not insist--I must

have my way in this."



Then Mr. Buckstone drew off his forces and proceeded to make a wily

advance upon the fortress under cover of carefully--contrived artifices

and stratagems of war.  But he contended with an alert and suspicious

enemy; and so at the end of two hours it was manifest to him that he had

made but little progress.  Still, he had made some; he was sure of that.



Laura sat alone and communed with herself;



"He is fairly hooked, poor thing.  I can play him at my leisure and land

him when I choose.  He was all ready to be caught, days and days ago

--I saw that, very well.  He will vote for our bill--no fear about that;

and moreover he will work for it, too, before I am done with him.  If he

had a woman's eyes he would have noticed that the spray of box had grown

three inches since he first gave it to me, but a man never sees anything

and never suspects.  If I had shown him a whole bush he would have

thought it was the same.  Well, it is a good night's work: the committee

is safe.  But this is a desperate game I am playing in these days

--a wearing, sordid, heartless game.  If I lose, I lose everything--even

myself.  And if I win the game, will it be worth its cost after all?

I do not know.  Sometimes I doubt.  Sometimes I half wish I had not

begun.  But no matter; I have begun, and I will never turn back; never

while I live."



Mr. Buckstone indulged in a reverie as he walked homeward:



"She is shrewd and deep, and plays her cards with considerable

discretion--but she will lose, for all that.  There is no hurry; I shall

come out winner, all in good time.  She is the most beautiful woman in

the world; and she surpassed herself to-night.  I suppose I must vote for

that bill, in the end maybe; but that is not a matter of much consequence

the government can stand it.  She is bent on capturing me, that is plain;

but she will find by and by that what she took for a sleeping garrison

was an ambuscade."









CHAPTER XXXVIII.



          Now this surprising news caus'd her fall in 'a trance,

          Life as she were dead, no limbs she could advance,

          Then her dear brother came, her from the ground he took

          And she spake up and said, O my poor heart is broke.



                              The Barnardcastle Tragedy.



"Don't you think he is distinguished looking?"



"What! That gawky looking person, with Miss Hawkins?"



"There.  He's just speaking to Mrs. Schoonmaker.  Such high-bred

negligence and unconsciousness.  Nothing studied.  See his fine eyes."



"Very.  They are moving this way now.  Maybe he is coming here.  But he

looks as helpless as a rag baby.  Who is he, Blanche?"



"Who is he?  And you've been here a week, Grace, and don't know?  He's

the catch of the season.  That's Washington Hawkins--her brother."



"No, is it?"



"Very old family, old Kentucky family I believe.  He's got enormous

landed property in Tennessee, I think.  The family lost everything,

slaves and that sort of thing, you know, in the war.  But they have a

great deal of land, minerals, mines and all that.  Mr. Hawkins and his

sister too are very much interested in the amelioration of the condition

of the colored race; they have some plan, with Senator Dilworthy, to

convert a large part of their property to something another for the

freedmen."



"You don't say so?  I thought he was some guy from Pennsylvania.  But he

is different from others.  Probably he has lived all his life on his

plantation."



It was a day reception of Mrs. Representative Schoonmaker, a sweet woman,

of simple and sincere manners.  Her house was one of the most popular in

Washington.  There was less ostentation there than in some others, and

people liked to go where the atmosphere reminded them of the peace and

purity of home.  Mrs. Schoonmaker was as natural and unaffected in

Washington society as she was in her own New York house, and kept up the

spirit of home-life there, with her husband and children.  And that was

the reason, probably, why people of refinement liked to go there.



Washington is a microcosm, and one can suit himself with any sort of

society within a radius of a mile.  To a large portion of the people who

frequent Washington or dwell where, the ultra fashion, the shoddy, the

jobbery are as utterly distasteful as they would he in a refined New

England City.  Schoonmaker was not exactly a leader in the House, but he

was greatly respected for his fine talents and his honesty.  No one would

have thought of offering to carry National Improvement Directors Relief

stock for him.



These day receptions were attended by more women than men, and those

interested in the problem might have studied the costumes of the ladies

present, in view of this fact, to discover whether women dress more for

the eyes of women or for effect upon men.  It is a very important

problem, and has been a good deal discussed, and its solution would form

one fixed, philosophical basis, upon which to estimate woman's character.

We are inclined to take a medium ground, and aver that woman dresses to

please herself, and in obedience to a law of her own nature.



"They are coming this way," said Blanche.  People who made way for them

to pass, turned to look at them.  Washington began to feel that the eyes

of the public were on him also, and his eyes rolled about, now towards

the ceiling, now towards the floor, in an effort to look unconscious.



"Good morning, Miss Hawkins.  Delighted.  Mr. Hawkins.  My friend, Miss

Medlar."



Mr. Hawkins, who was endeavoring to square himself for a bow, put his

foot through the train of Mrs. Senator Poplin, who looked round with a

scowl, which turned into a smile as she saw who it was.  In extricating

himself, Mr. Hawkins, who had the care of his hat as well as the

introduction on his mind, shambled against Miss Blanche, who said pardon,

with the prettiest accent, as if the awkwardness were her own.  And Mr.

Hawkins righted himself.



"Don't you find it very warm to-day, Mr. Hawkins?" said Blanche, by way

of a remark.



"It's awful hot," said Washington.



"It's warm for the season," continued Blanche pleasantly.  "But I suppose

you are accustomed to it," she added, with a general idea that the

thermometer always stands at 90 deg. in all parts of the late slave

states.  "Washington weather generally cannot be very congenial to you?"



"It's congenial," said Washington brightening up, "when it's not

congealed."



"That's very good.  Did you hear, Grace, Mr. Hawkins says it's congenial

when it's not congealed."



"What is, dear?" said Grace, who was talking with Laura.



The conversation was now finely under way.  Washington launched out an

observation of his own.



"Did you see those Japs, Miss Leavitt?"



"Oh, yes, aren't they queer.  But so high-bred, so picturesque.  Do you

think that color makes any difference, Mr. Hawkins?  I used to be so

prejudiced against color."



"Did you?  I never was.  I used to think my old mammy was handsome."



"How interesting your life must have been!  I should like to hear about

it."



Washington was about settling himself into his narrative style,

when Mrs. Gen. McFingal caught his eye.



"Have you been at the Capitol to-day, Mr. Hawkins?"



Washington had not.  "Is anything uncommon going on?"



"They say it was very exciting.  The Alabama business you know.

Gen.  Sutler, of Massachusetts, defied England, and they say he wants

war."



"He wants to make himself conspicuous more like," said Laura.

"He always, you have noticed, talks with one eye on the gallery, while

the other is on the speaker."



"Well, my husband says, its nonsense to talk of war, and wicked.

He knows what war is.  If we do have war, I hope it will be for the

patriots of Cuba.  Don't you think we want Cuba, Mr. Hawkins?"



"I think we want it bad," said Washington.  "And Santo Domingo.  Senator

Dilworthy says, we are bound to extend our religion over the isles of the

sea.  We've got to round out our territory, and--"



Washington's further observations were broken off by Laura, who whisked

him off to another part of the room, and reminded him that they must make

their adieux.



"How stupid and tiresome these people are," she said.  "Let's go."



They were turning to say good-by to the hostess, when Laura's attention

was arrested by the sight of a gentleman  who was just speaking to Mrs.

Schoonmaker.  For a second her heart stopped beating.  He was a handsome

man of forty and perhaps more, with grayish hair and whiskers, and he

walked with a cane, as if he were slightly lame.  He might be less than

forty, for his face was worn into hard lines, and he was pale.



No.  It could not be, she said to herself.  It is only a resemblance.

But as the gentleman turned and she saw his full face, Laura put out her

hand and clutched Washington's arm to prevent herself from falling.



Washington, who was not minding anything, as usual, looked 'round in

wonder.  Laura's eyes were blazing fire and hatred; he had never seen her

look so before; and her face, was livid.



"Why, what is it, sis?  Your face is as white as paper."



"It's he, it's he.  Come, come," and she dragged him away.



"It's who?" asked Washington, when they had gained the carriage.



"It's nobody, it's nothing.  Did I say he?  I was faint with the heat.

Don't mention it.  Don't you speak of it," she added earnestly, grasping

his arm.



When she had gained her room she went to the glass and saw a pallid and

haggard face.



"My God," she cried, "this will never do.  I should have killed him, if I

could.  The scoundrel still lives, and dares to come here.  I ought to

kill him.  He has no right to live.  How I hate him.  And yet I loved

him.  Oh heavens, how I did love that man.  And why didn't he kill me?

He might better.  He did kill all that was good in me.  Oh, but he shall

not escape.  He shall not escape this time.  He may have forgotten.  He

will find that a woman's hate doesn't forget.  The law?  What would the

law do but protect him and make me an outcast?  How all Washington would

gather up its virtuous skirts and avoid me, if it knew.  I wonder if he

hates me as I do him?"



So Laura raved, in tears and in rage by turns, tossed in a tumult of

passion, which she gave way to with little effort to control.



A servant came to summon her to dinner.  She had a headache.  The hour

came for the President's reception.  She had a raving headache, and the

Senator must go without her.



That night of agony was like another night she recalled.  How vividly it

all came back to her.  And at that time she remembered she thought she

might be mistaken.  He might come back to her.  Perhaps he loved her,

a little, after all.  Now, she knew he did not.  Now, she knew he was a

cold-blooded scoundrel, without pity.  Never a word in all these years.

She had hoped he was dead.  Did his wife live, she wondered.  She caught

at that--and it gave a new current to her thoughts.  Perhaps, after all

--she must see him.  She could not live without seeing him.  Would he smile

as in the old days when she loved him so; or would he sneer as when she

last saw him?  If be looked so, she hated him.  If he should call her

"Laura, darling," and look SO!  She must find him.  She must end her

doubts.



Laura kept her room for two days, on one excuse and another--a nervous

headache, a cold--to the great anxiety of the Senator's household.

Callers, who went away, said she had been too gay--they did not say

"fast," though some of them may have thought it.  One so conspicuous and

successful in society as Laura could not be out of the way two days,

without remarks being made, and not all of them complimentary.



When she came down she appeared as usual, a little pale may be, but

unchanged in manner.  If there were any deepened lines about the eyes

they had been concealed.  Her course of action was quite determined.



At breakfast she asked if any one had heard any unusual noise during the

night?  Nobody had.  Washington never heard any noise of any kind after

his eyes were shut.  Some people thought he never did when they were open

either.



Senator Dilworthy said he had come in late.  He was detained in a little

consultation after the Congressional prayer meeting.  Perhaps it was his

entrance.



No, Laura said.  She heard that.  It was later.  She might have been

nervous, but she fancied somebody was trying to get into the house.



Mr. Brierly humorously suggested that it might be, as none of the members

were occupied in night session.



The Senator frowned, and said he did not like to hear that kind of

newspaper slang.  There might be burglars about.



Laura said that very likely it was only her nervousness.  But she thought

she world feel safer if Washington would let her take one of his pistols.

Washington brought her one of his revolvers, and instructed her in the

art of loading and firing it.



During the morning Laura drove down to Mrs. Schoonmaker's to pay a

friendly call.



"Your receptions are always delightful," she said to that lady, "the

pleasant people all seem to come here."



"It's pleasant to hear you say so, Miss Hawkins.  I believe my friends

like to come here.  Though society in Washington is mixed; we have a

little of everything."



"I suppose, though, you don't see much of the old rebel element?" said

Laura with a smile.



If this seemed to Mrs. Schoonmaker a singular remark for a lady to make,

who was meeting "rebels" in society every day, she did not express it in

any way, but only said,



"You know we don't say 'rebel' anymore.  Before we came to Washington I

thought rebels would look unlike other people.  I find we are very much

alike, and that kindness and good nature wear away prejudice.  And then

you know there are all sorts of common interests.  My husband sometimes

says that he doesn't see but confederates are just as eager to get at the

treasury as Unionists.  You know that Mr. Schoonmaker is on the

appropriations."



"Does he know many Southerners?"



"Oh, yes.  There were several at my reception the other day.  Among

others a confederate Colonel--a stranger--handsome man with gray hair,

probably you didn't notice him, uses a cane in walking.  A very agreeable

man.  I wondered why he called.  When my husband came home and looked

over the cards, he said he had a cotton claim.  A real southerner.

Perhaps you might know him if I could think of his name.  Yes, here's his

card--Louisiana."



Laura took the card, looked at it intently till she was sure of the

address, and then laid it down, with,



"No, he is no friend of ours."



That afternoon, Laura wrote and dispatched the following note.  It was in

a round hand, unlike her flowing style, and it was directed to a number

and street in Georgetown:--



     "A Lady at Senator Dilworthy's would like to see Col. George Selby,

     on business connected with the Cotton Claims.  Can he call Wednesday

     at three o'clock P. M.?"



On Wednesday at 3 P. M, no one of the family was likely to be in the

house except Laura.









CHAPTER XXXIX.



Col. Selby had just come to Washington, and taken lodgings in Georgetown.

His business was to get pay for some cotton that was destroyed during the

war.  There were many others in Washington on the same errand, some of

them with claims as difficult to establish as his.  A concert of action

was necessary, and he was not, therefore, at all surprised to receive the

note from a lady asking him to call at Senator Dilworthy's.



At a little after three on Wednesday he rang the bell of the Senator's

residence.  It was a handsome mansion on the Square opposite the

President's house.  The owner must be a man of great wealth, the Colonel

thought; perhaps, who knows, said he with a smile, he may have got some

of my cotton in exchange for salt and quinine after the capture of New

Orleans.  As this thought passed through his mind he was looking at the

remarkable figure of the Hero of New Orleans, holding itself by main

strength from sliding off the back of the rearing bronze horse, and

lifting its hat in the manner of one who acknowledges the playing of that

martial air: "See, the Conquering Hero Comes!"  "Gad," said the Colonel

to himself, "Old Hickory ought to get down and give his seat to Gen.

Sutler--but they'd have to tie him on."



Laura was in the drawing room.  She heard the bell, she heard the steps

in the hall, and the emphatic thud of the supporting cane.  She had risen

from her chair and was leaning against the piano, pressing her left hand

against the violent beating of her heart.  The door opened and the

Colonel entered, standing in the full light of the opposite window.

Laura was more in the shadow and stood for an instant, long enough for

the Colonel to make the inward observation that she was a magnificent

Woman.  She then advanced a step.



"Col. Selby, is it not?"



The Colonel staggered back, caught himself by a chair, and turned towards

her a look of terror.



"Laura?  My God!"



"Yes, your wife!"



"Oh, no, it can't be.  How came you here?  I thought you were--"



"You thought I was dead?  You thought you were rid of me?  Not so long as

you live, Col. Selby, not so long as you live;" Laura in her passion was

hurried on to say.



No man had ever accused Col. Selby of cowardice.  But he was a coward

before this woman.  May be he was not the man he once was.  Where was his

coolness?  Where was his sneering, imperturbable manner, with which he

could have met, and would have met, any woman he had wronged, if he had

only been forewarned.  He felt now that he must temporize, that he must

gain time.  There was danger in Laura's tone.  There was something

frightful in her calmness.  Her steady eyes seemed to devour him.



"You have ruined my life," she said; "and I was so young, so ignorant,

and loved you so.  You betrayed me, and left me mocking me and trampling

me into the dust, a soiled cast-off.  You might better have killed me

then.  Then I should not have hated you."



"Laura," said the Colonel, nerving himself, but still pale, and speaking

appealingly, "don't say that.  Reproach me.  I deserve it.  I was a

scoundrel.  I was everything monstrous.  But your beauty made me crazy.

You are right.  I was a brute in leaving you as I did.  But what could I

do?  I was married, and--"



"And your wife still lives?" asked Laura, bending a little forward in her

eagerness.



The Colonel noticed the action, and he almost said "no," but he thought

of the folly of attempting concealment.



"Yes.  She is here."



What little color had wandered back into Laura's face forsook it again.

Her heart stood still, her strength seemed going from her limbs.  Her

last hope was gone.  The room swam before her for a moment, and the

Colonel stepped towards her, but she waved him back, as hot anger again

coursed through her veins, and said,



"And you dare come with her, here, and tell me of it, here and mock me

with it!  And you think I will have it; George?  You think I will let you

live with that woman?  You think I am as powerless as that day I fell

dead at your feet?"



She raged now.  She was in a tempest of excitement.  And she advanced

towards him with a threatening mien.  She would kill me if she could,

thought the Colonel; but he thought at the same moment, how beautiful she

is.  He had recovered his head now.  She was lovely when he knew her,

then a simple country girl, Now she was dazzling, in the fullness of ripe

womanhood, a superb creature, with all the fascination that a woman of

the world has for such a man as Col. Selby.  Nothing of this was lost on

him.  He stepped quickly to her, grasped both her hands in his, and said,



"Laura, stop!  think!  Suppose I loved you yet!  Suppose I hated my fate!

What can I do?  I am broken by the war.  I have lost everything almost.

I had as lief be dead and done with it."



The Colonel spoke with a low remembered voice that thrilled through

Laura.  He was looking into her eyes as he had looked  in those old days,

when no birds of all those that sang in the groves where they walked sang

a note of warning.  He was wounded.  He had been punished.  Her strength

forsook her with her rage, and she sank upon a chair, sobbing,



"Oh!  my God, I thought I hated him!"



The Colonel knelt beside her.  He took her hand and she let him keep it.

She, looked down into his face, with a pitiable tenderness, and said in a

weak voice.



"And you do love me a little?"



The Colonel vowed and protested.  He kissed her hand and her lips.  He

swore his false soul into perdition.



She wanted love, this woman.  Was not her love for George Selby deeper

than any other woman's could be?  Had she not a right to him?  Did he

not belong to her by virtue of her overmastering passion?  His wife--she

was not his wife, except by the law.  She could not be.  Even with the

law she could have no right to stand between two souls that were one.

It was an infamous condition in society that George should be tied to

her.



Laura thought this, believed it; because she desired to believe it.  She

came to it as an original propositions founded an the requirements of her

own nature.  She may have heard, doubtless she had, similar theories that

were prevalent at that day, theories of the tyranny of marriage and of

the freedom of marriage.  She had even heard women lecturers say, that

marriage should only continue so long as it pleased either party to it

--for a year, or a month, or a day.  She had not given much heed to this,

but she saw its justice now in a dash of revealing desire.  It must be

right.  God would not have permitted her to love George Selby as she did,

and him to love her, if it was right for society to raise up a barrier

between them.  He belonged to her.  Had he not confessed it himself?



Not even the religious atmosphere of Senator Dilworthy's house had been

sufficient to instill into Laura that deep Christian principle which had

been somehow omitted in her training.  Indeed in that very house had she

not heard women, prominent before the country and besieging Congress,

utter sentiments that fully justified the course she was marking out for

herself.



They were seated now, side by side, talking with more calmness.  Laura

was happy, or thought she was.  But it was that feverish sort of

happiness which is snatched out of the black shadow of falsehood, and is

at the moment recognized as fleeting and perilous, and indulged

tremblingly.  She loved.  She was loved.  That is happiness certainly.

And the black past and the troubled present and the uncertain future

could not snatch that from her.



What did they say as they sat there?  What nothings do people usually say

in such circumstances, even if they are three-score and ten?  It was

enough for Laura to hear his voice and be near him.  It was enough for

him to be near her, and avoid committing himself as much as he could.

Enough for him was the present also.  Had there not always been some way

out of such scrapes?



And yet Laura could not be quite content without prying into tomorrow.

How could the Colonel manage to free himself from his wife?  Would it be

long?  Could he not go into some State where it would not take much time?

He could not say exactly.  That they must think of.  That they must talk

over.  And so on.  Did this seem like a damnable plot to Laura against

the life, maybe, of a sister, a woman like herself?  Probably not.

It was right that this man should be hers, and there were some obstacles

in the way.  That was all.  There are as good reasons for bad actions as

for good ones,--to those who commit them.  When one has broken the tenth

commandment, the others are not of much account.



Was it unnatural, therefore, that when George Selby departed, Laura

should watch him from the window, with an almost joyful heart as he went

down the sunny square?  "I shall see him to-morrow," she said, "and the

next day, and the next.  He is mine now."



"Damn the woman," said the Colonel as he picked his way down the steps.

"Or," he added, as his thoughts took a new turn, "I wish my wife was in

New Orleans."









CHAPTER XL.



          Open your ears; for which of you will stop,

          The vent of hearing when loud Rumor speaks?

          I, from the orient to the drooping west,

          Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold

          The acts commenced on this ball of earth:

          Upon my tongues continual slanders ride;

          The which in every, language I pronounce,

          Stuffing the ears of men with false reports.



                                             King Henry IV.



As may be readily believed, Col. Beriah Sellers was by this time one of

the best known men in Washington.  For the first time in his life his

talents had a fair field.



He was now at the centre of the manufacture of gigantic schemes,

of speculations of all sorts, of political and social gossip.

The atmosphere was full of little and big rumors and of vast, undefined

expectations.  Everybody was in haste, too, to push on his private plan,

and feverish in his haste, as if in constant apprehension that tomorrow

would be Judgment Day.  Work while Congress is in session, said the

uneasy spirit, for in the recess there is no work and no device.



The Colonel enjoyed this bustle and confusion amazingly; he thrived in

the air of-indefinite expectation.  All his own schemes took larger shape

and more misty and majestic proportions; and in this congenial air, the

Colonel seemed even to himself to expand into something large and

mysterious.  If he respected himself before, he almost worshipped Beriah

Sellers now, as a superior being.  If he could have chosen an official

position out of the highest, he would have been embarrassed in the

selection.  The presidency of the republic seemed too limited and cramped

in the constitutional restrictions.  If he could have been Grand Llama of

the United States, that might have come the nearest to his idea of a

position.  And next to that he would have luxuriated in the irresponsible

omniscience of the Special Correspondent.



Col. Sellers knew the President very well, and had access to his presence

when officials were kept cooling their heels in the Waiting-room.  The

President liked to hear the Colonel talk, his voluble ease was a

refreshment after the decorous dullness of men who only talked business

and government, and everlastingly expounded their notions of justice and

the distribution of patronage.  The Colonel was as much a lover of

farming and of horses as Thomas Jefferson was.  He talked to the

President by the hour about his magnificent stud, and his plantation at

Hawkeye, a kind of principality--he represented it.  He urged the

President to pay him a visit during the recess, and see his stock farm.



"The President's table is well enough," he used to say, to the loafers

who gathered about him at Willard's, "well enough for a man on a salary,

but God bless my soul, I should like him to see a little old-fashioned

hospitality--open house, you know.  A person seeing me at home might

think I paid no attention to what was in the house, just let things flow

in and out.  He'd be mistaken.  What I look to is quality, sir.  The

President has variety enough, but the quality!  Vegetables of course you

can't expect here.  I'm very particular about mine.  Take celery, now

--there's only one spot in this country where celery will grow.  But I an

surprised about the wines.  I should think they were manufactured in the

New York Custom House.  I must send the President some from my cellar.

I was really mortified the other day at dinner to see Blacque Bey leave

his standing in the glasses."



When the Colonel first came to Washington he had thoughts of taking the

mission to Constantinople, in order to be on the spot to look after the

dissemination, of his Eye Water, but as that invention; was not yet quite

ready, the project shrank a little in the presence of vaster schemes.

Besides he felt that he could do the country more good by remaining at

home.  He was one of the Southerners who were constantly quoted as

heartily "accepting the situation."



"I'm whipped," he used to say with a jolly laugh, "the government was too

many for me; I'm cleaned out, done for, except my plantation and private

mansion.  We played for a big thing, and lost it, and I don't whine, for

one.  I go for putting the old flag on all the vacant lots.  I said to

the President, says I, 'Grant, why don't you take Santo Domingo, annex

the whole thing, and settle the bill afterwards.  That's my way.  I'd,

take the job to manage Congress.  The South would come into it.  You've

got to conciliate the South, consolidate the two debts, pay 'em off in

greenbacks, and go ahead.  That's my notion.  Boutwell's got the right

notion about the value of paper, but he lacks courage. I should like to

run the treasury department about six months.  I'd make things plenty,

and business look up.'"



The Colonel had access to the departments.  He knew all the senators and

representatives, and especially, the lobby.  He was consequently a great

favorite in Newspaper Row, and was often lounging in the offices there,

dropping bits of private, official information, which were immediately,

caught up and telegraphed all over the country.  But it need to surprise

even the Colonel when he read it, it was embellished to that degree that

he hardly recognized it, and the hint was not lost on him.  He began to

exaggerate his heretofore simple conversation to suit the newspaper

demand.



People used to wonder in the winters of 187- and 187-, where the

"Specials" got that remarkable information with which they every morning

surprised the country, revealing the most secret intentions of the

President and his cabinet, the private thoughts of political leaders,

the hidden meaning of every movement.  This information was furnished by

Col. Sellers.



When he was asked, afterwards, about the stolen copy of the Alabama

Treaty which got into the "New York Tribune," he only looked mysterious,

and said that neither he nor Senator Dilworthy knew anything about it.

But those whom he was in the habit of meeting occasionally felt almost

certain that he did know.



It must not be supposed that the Colonel in his general patriotic labors

neglected his own affairs.  The Columbus River Navigation Scheme absorbed

only a part of his time, so he was enabled to throw quite a strong

reserve force of energy into the Tennessee Land plan, a vast enterprise

commensurate with his abilities, and in the prosecution of which he was

greatly aided by Mr. Henry Brierly, who was buzzing about the capitol and

the hotels day and night, and making capital for it in some mysterious

way.



"We must create, a public opinion," said Senator Dilworthy.  "My only

interest in it is a public one, and if the country wants the institution,

Congress will have to yield."



It may have been after a conversation between the Colonel and Senator

Dilworthy that the following special despatch was sent to a New York

newspaper:



     "We understand that a philanthropic plan is on foot in relation to

     the colored race that will, if successful, revolutionize the whole

     character of southern industry.  An experimental institution is in

     contemplation in Tennessee which will do for that state what the

     Industrial School at Zurich did for Switzerland.  We learn that

     approaches have been made to the heirs of the late Hon. Silas

     Hawkins of Missouri, in reference to a lease of a portion of their

     valuable property in East Tennessee.  Senator Dilworthy, it is

     understood, is inflexibly opposed to any arrangement that will not

     give the government absolute control.  Private interests must give

     way to the public good.  It is to be hoped that Col. Sellers, who

     represents the heirs, will be led to see the matter in this light."



When Washington Hawkins read this despatch, he went to the Colonel in

some anxiety.  He was for a lease, he didn't want to surrender anything.

What did he think the government would offer?  Two millions?



"May be three, may be four," said the Colonel, "it's worth more than the

bank of England."



"If they will not lease," said Washington, "let 'em make it two millions

for an undivided half.  I'm not going to throw it away, not the whole of

it."



Harry told the Colonel that they must drive the thing through, he

couldn't be dallying round Washington when Spring opened.  Phil wanted

him, Phil had a great thing on hand up in Pennsylvania.



"What is that?" inquired the Colonel, always ready to interest himself in

anything large.



"A mountain of coal; that's all.  He's going to run a tunnel into it in

the Spring."



"Does he want any capital?", asked the Colonel, in the tone of a man who

is given to calculating carefully before he makes an investment.



"No.  Old man Bolton's behind him.  He has capital, but I judged that he

wanted my experience in starting."



"If he wants me, tell him I'll come, after Congress adjourns.  I should

like to give him a little lift.  He lacks enterprise--now, about that

Columbus River.  He doesn't see his chances.  But he's a good fellow, and

you can tell him that Sellers won't go back on him."



"By the way," asked Harry, "who is that rather handsome party that's

hanging 'round Laura?  I see him with her everywhere, at the Capitol, in

the horse cars, and he comes to Dilworthy's.  If he weren't lame, I

should think he was going to run off with her."



"Oh, that's nothing.  Laura knows her business.  He has a cotton claim.

Used to be at Hawkeye during the war.



"Selby's his name, was a Colonel.  Got a wife and family.

Very respectable people, the Selby's."



"Well, that's all right," said Harry, "if it's business.  But if a woman

looked at me as I've seen her at Selby, I should understand it.  And it's

talked about, I can tell you."



Jealousy had no doubt sharpened this young gentleman's observation.

Laura could not have treated him with more lofty condescension if she had

been the Queen of Sheba, on a royal visit to the great republic.  And he

resented it, and was "huffy" when he was with her, and ran her errands,

and brought her gossip, and bragged of his intimacy with the lovely

creature among the fellows at Newspaper Row.



Laura's life was rushing on now in the full stream of intrigue and

fashionable dissipation.  She was conspicuous at the balls of the fastest

set, and was suspected of being present at those doubtful suppers that

began late and ended early.  If Senator Dilworthy remonstrated about

appearances, she had a way of silencing him.  Perhaps she had some hold

on him, perhaps she was necessary to his plan for ameliorating the

condition the tube colored race.



She saw Col. Selby, when the public knew and when it did not know.

She would see him, whatever excuses he made, and however he avoided her.

She was urged on by a fever of love and hatred and jealousy, which

alternately possessed her.  Sometimes she petted him, and coaxed him and

tried all her fascinations.  And again she threatened him and reproached

him.  What was he doing?  Why had he taken no steps to free himself?

Why didn't he send his wife home?  She should have money soon.

They could go to Europe--anywhere.  What did she care for talk?



And he promised, and lied, and invented fresh excuses for delay, like a

cowardly gambler and roue as he was, fearing to break with her, and half

the time unwilling to give her up.



"That woman doesn't know what fear is," he said to himself, "and she

watches me like a hawk."



He told his wife that this woman was a lobbyist, whom he had to tolerate

and use in getting through his claims, and that he should pay her and

have done with her, when he succeeded.









CHAPTER XLI.



Henry Brierly was at the Dilworthy's constantly and on such terms of

intimacy that he came and went without question.  The Senator was not an

inhospitable man, he liked to have guests in his house, and Harry's gay

humor and rattling way entertained him; for even the most devout men and

busy statesmen must have hours of relaxation.



Harry himself believed that he was of great service in the University

business, and that the success of the scheme depended upon him to a great

degree.  He spent many hours in talking it over with the Senator after

dinner.  He went so far as to consider whether it would be worth his

while to take the professorship of civil engineering in the new

institution.



But it was not the Senator's society nor his dinners--at which this

scapegrace remarked that there was too much grace and too little wine

--which attracted him to the horse.  The fact was the poor fellow hung

around there day after day for the chance of seeing Laura for five

minutes at a time.  For her presence at dinner he would endure the long

bore of the Senator's talk afterwards, while Laura was off at some

assembly, or excused herself on the plea of fatigue.  Now and then he

accompanied her to some reception, and rarely, on off nights, he was

blessed with her company in the parlor, when he sang, and was chatty and

vivacious and performed a hundred little tricks of imitation and

ventriloquism, and made himself as entertaining as a man could be.



It puzzled him not a little that all his fascinations seemed to go for so

little with Laura; it was beyond his experience with women.  Sometimes

Laura was exceedingly kind and petted him a little, and took the trouble

to exert her powers of pleasing, and to entangle him deeper and deeper.

But this, it angered him afterwards to think, was in private; in public

she was beyond his reach, and never gave occasion to the suspicion that

she had any affair with him.  He was never permitted to achieve the

dignity of a serious flirtation with her in public.



"Why do you treat me so?" he once said, reproachfully.



"Treat you how?" asked Laura in a sweet voice, lifting her eyebrows.



"You know well enough.  You let other fellows monopolize you in society,

and you are as indifferent to me as if we were strangers."



"Can I help it if they are attentive, can I be rude?  But we are such old

friends, Mr. Brierly, that I didn't suppose you would be jealous."



"I think I must be a very old friend, then, by your conduct towards me.

By the same rule I should judge that Col. Selby must be very new."



Laura looked up quickly, as if about to return an indignant answer to

such impertinence, but she only said, "Well, what of Col. Selby,

sauce-box?"



"Nothing, probably, you'll care for.  Your being with him so much is the

town talk, that's all?"



"What do people say?" asked Laura calmly.



"Oh, they say a good many things.  You are offended, though, to have me

speak of it?"



"Not in the least.  You are my true friend.  I feel that I can trust you.

You wouldn't deceive me, Harry?"  throwing into her eyes a look of trust

and tenderness that melted away all his petulance and distrust.  "What do

they say?"



"Some say that you've lost your head about him; others that you don't

care any more for him than you do for a dozen others, but that he is

completely fascinated with you and about to desert his wife; and others

say it is nonsense to suppose you would entangle yourself with a married

man, and that your intimacy only arises from the matter of the cotton,

claims, for which he wants your influence with Dilworthy.  But you know

everybody is talked about more or less in Washington.  I shouldn't care;

but I wish you wouldn't have so much to do with Selby, Laura," continued

Harry, fancying that he was now upon such terms that his, advice, would

be heeded.



"And you believed these slanders?"



"I don't believe anything against you, Laura, but Col. Selby does not

mean you any good.  I know you wouldn't be seen with him if you knew his

reputation."



"Do you know him?"  Laura asked, as indifferently as she could.



"Only a little.  I was at his lodgings' in Georgetown a day or two ago,

with Col. Sellers.  Sellers wanted to talk with him about some patent

remedy he has, Eye Water, or something of that sort, which he wants to

introduce into Europe.  Selby is going abroad very soon."



Laura started; in spite of her self-control.



"And his wife!--Does he take his family?  Did you see his wife?"



"Yes.  A dark little woman, rather worn--must have been pretty once

though.  Has three or four children, one of them a baby.  They'll all

go of course.  She said she should be glad enough to get away from

Washington.  You know Selby has got his claim allowed, and they say he

has had a run, of luck lately at Morrissey's."



Laura heard all this in a kind of stupor, looking straight at Harry,

without seeing him.  Is it possible, she was thinking, that this base

wretch, after, all his promises, will take his wife and children and

leave me?  Is it possible the town is saying all these things about me?

And a look of bitterness coming into her face--does the fool think he can

escape so?



"You are angry with me, Laura," said Harry, not comprehending in the

least what was going on in her mind.



"Angry?" she said, forcing herself to come back to his presence.

"With you?  Oh no.  I'm angry with the cruel world, which, pursues an

independent woman as it never does a man.  I'm grateful to you Harry;

I'm grateful to you for telling me of that odious man."



And she rose from her chair and gave him her pretty hand, which the silly

fellow took, and kissed and clung to.  And he said many silly things,

before she disengaged herself gently, and left him, saying it was time to

dress, for dinner.



And Harry went away, excited, and a little hopeful, but only a little.

The happiness was only a gleam, which departed and left him thoroughly,

miserable.  She never would love him, and she was going to the devil,

besides.  He couldn't shut his eyes to what he saw, nor his ears to what

he heard of her.



What had come over this thrilling young lady-killer?  It was a pity to see

such a gay butterfly broken on a wheel.  Was there something good in him,

after all, that had been touched?  He was in fact madly in love with this

woman.



It is not for us to analyze the passion and say whether it was a worthy

one.  It absorbed his whole nature and made him wretched enough.  If he

deserved punishment, what more would you have?  Perhaps this love was

kindling a new heroism in him.



He saw the road on which Laura was going clearly enough, though he did

not believe the worst he heard of her.  He  loved her too passionately to

credit that for a moment.  And it seemed to him that if he could compel

her to recognize her position, and his own devotion, she might love him,

and  that he could save her.  His love was so far ennobled, and become a

very different thing from its beginning in Hawkeye.  Whether he ever

thought that if he could save her from ruin, he could give her up

himself, is doubtful.  Such a pitch of virtue does not occur often in

real life, especially in such natures as Harry's, whose generosity and

unselfishness were matters of temperament rather than habits or

principles.



He wrote a long letter to Laura, an incoherent, passionate letter,

pouring out his love as he could not do in her presence, and warning her

as plainly as he dared of the dangers that surrounded her, and the risks

she ran of compromising herself in many ways.



Laura read the letter, with a little sigh may be, as she thought of other

days, but with contempt also, and she put it into the fire with the

thought, "They are all alike."



Harry was in the habit of writing to Philip freely, and boasting also

about his doings, as he could not help doing and remain himself.

Mixed up with his own exploits, and his daily triumphs as a lobbyist,

especially in the matter of the new University, in which Harry was to

have something handsome, were amusing sketches of Washington society,

hints about Dilworthy, stories about Col. Sellers, who had become a

well-known character, and wise remarks upon the machinery of private

legislation for the public-good, which greatly entertained Philip in his

convalescence.



Laura's name occurred very often in these letters, at first in casual

mention as the belle of the season, carrying everything before her with

her wit and beauty, and then more seriously, as if Harry did not exactly

like so much general admiration of her, and was a little nettled by her

treatment of him.



This was so different from Harry's usual tone about women, that Philip

wondered a good deal over it.  Could it be possible that he was seriously

affected?  Then came stories about Laura, town talk, gossip which Harry

denied the truth of indignantly; but he was evidently uneasy, and at

length wrote in such miserable spirits that Philip asked him squarely

what the trouble was; was he in love?



Upon this, Harry made a clean breast of it, and told Philip all he knew

about the Selby affair, and Laura's treatment of him, sometimes

encouraging him--and then throwing him off, and finally his belief that

she would go, to the bad if something was not done to arouse her from her

infatuation.  He wished Philip was in Washington.  He knew Laura, and she

had a great respect for his character, his opinions, his judgment.

Perhaps he, as an uninterested person whom she would have some

confidence, and as one of the public, could say some thing to her that

would show her where she stood.



Philip saw the situation clearly enough.  Of Laura he knew not much,

except that she was a woman of uncommon fascination, and he thought from

what he had seen of her in Hawkeye, her conduct towards him and towards

Harry, of not too much principle.  Of course he knew nothing of her

history; he knew nothing seriously against her, and if Harry was

desperately enamored of her, why should he not win her if he could.

If, however, she had already become what Harry uneasily felt she might

become, was it not his duty to go to the rescue of his friend and try to

save him from any rash act on account of a woman that might prove to be

entirely unworthy of him; for trifler and visionary as he was, Harry

deserved a better fate than this.



Philip determined to go to Washington and see for himself.  He had other

reasons also.  He began to know enough of Mr. Bolton's affairs to be

uneasy.  Pennybacker had been there several times during the winter, and

he suspected that he was involving Mr. Bolton in some doubtful scheme.

Pennybacker was in Washington, and Philip thought he might perhaps find

out something about him, and his plans, that would be of service to Mr.

Bolton.



Philip had enjoyed his winter very well, for a man with his arm broken

and his head smashed.  With two such nurses as Ruth and Alice, illness

seemed to him rather a nice holiday, and every moment of his

convalescence had been precious and all too fleeting.  With a young

fellow of the habits of Philip, such injuries cannot be counted on to

tarry long, even for the purpose of love-making, and Philip found himself

getting strong with even disagreeable rapidity.



During his first weeks of pain and weakness, Ruth was unceasing in her

ministrations; she quietly took charge of him, and with a gentle firmness

resisted all attempts of Alice or any one else to share to any great

extent the burden with her.  She was clear, decisive and peremptory in

whatever she did; but often when Philip, opened his eyes in those first

days of suffering and found her standing by his bedside, he saw a look of

tenderness in her anxious face that quickened his already feverish pulse,

a look that, remained in his heart long after he closed his eyes.

Sometimes he felt her hand on his forehead, and did not open his eyes for

fear she world take it away.  He watched for her coming to his chamber;

he could distinguish her light footstep from all others.  If this is what

is meant by women practicing medicine, thought Philip to himself, I like

it.



"Ruth," said he one day when he was getting to be quite himself,

"I believe in it?"



"Believe in what?"



"Why, in women physicians."



"Then, I'd better call in Mrs. Dr. Longstreet."



"Oh, no.  One will do, one at a time.  I think I should be well tomorrow,

if I thought I should never have any other."



"Thy physician thinks thee mustn't talk, Philip," said Ruth putting her

finger on his lips.



"But, Ruth, I want to tell you that I should wish I never had got well

if--"



"There, there, thee must not talk.  Thee is wandering again," and Ruth

closed his lips, with a smile on her own that broadened into a merry

laugh as she ran away.



Philip was not weary, however, of making these attempts, he rather

enjoyed it.  But whenever he inclined to be sentimental, Ruth would cut

him off, with some such gravely conceived speech as, "Does thee think

that thy physician will take advantage of the condition of a man who is

as weak as thee is?  I will call Alice, if thee has any dying confessions

to make."



As Philip convalesced, Alice more and more took Ruth's place as his

entertainer, and read to him by the hour, when he did not want to talk

--to talk about Ruth, as he did a good deal of the time.  Nor was this

altogether unsatisfactory to Philip.  He was always happy and contented

with Alice.  She was the most restful person he knew.  Better informed

than Ruth and with a much more varied culture, and bright and

sympathetic, he was never weary of her company, if he was not greatly

excited by it.  She had upon his mind that peaceful influence that Mrs.

Bolton had when, occasionally, she sat by his bedside with her work.

Some people have this influence, which is like an emanation.  They bring

peace to a house, they diffuse serene content in a room full of mixed

company, though they may say very little, and are apparently, unconscious

of their own power.



Not that Philip did not long for Ruth's presence all the same.  Since he

was well enough to be about the house, she was busy again with her

studies.  Now and then her teasing humor came again.  She always had a

playful shield against his sentiment.  Philip used sometimes to declare

that she had no sentiment; and then he doubted if he should be pleased

with her after all if she were at all sentimental; and he rejoiced that

she had, in such matters what he called the airy grace of sanity.  She

was the most gay serious person he ever saw.



Perhaps he waw not so much at rest or so contented with her as with

Alice.  But then he loved her.  And what have rest and contentment to do

with love?









CHAPTER XLII



Mr. Buckstone's campaign was brief--much briefer than he supposed it

would be.  He began it purposing to win Laura without being won himself;

but his experience was that of all who had fought on that field before

him; he diligently continued his effort to win her, but he presently

found that while as yet he could not feel entirely certain of having won

her, it was very manifest that she had won him.  He had made an able

fight, brief as it was, and that at least was to his credit.  He was in

good company, now; he walked in a leash of conspicuous captives.  These

unfortunates followed Laura helplessly, for whenever she took a prisoner

he remained her slave henceforth.  Sometimes they chafed in their

bondage; sometimes they tore themselves free and said their serfdom was

ended; but sooner or later they always came back penitent and worshiping.

Laura pursued her usual course: she encouraged Mr. Buckstone by turns,

and by turns she harassed him; she exalted him to the clouds at one time,

and at another she dragged him down again.  She constituted him chief

champion of the Knobs University bill, and he accepted the position, at

first reluctantly, but later as a valued means of serving her--he even

came to look upon it as a piece of great good fortune, since it brought

him into such frequent contact with her.



Through him she learned that the Hon. Mr. Trollop was a bitter enemy of

her bill.  He urged her not to attempt to influence Mr. Trollop in any

way, and explained that whatever she might attempt in that direction

would surely be used against her and with damaging effect.



She at first said she knew Mr. Trollop, "and was aware that he had a

Blank-Blank;"--[**Her private figure of speech for Brother--or

Son-in-law]--but Mr. Buckstone said that he was not able to conceive what

so curious a phrase as Blank-Blank might mean, and had no wish to pry

into the matter, since it was probably private, he "would nevertheless

venture the blind assertion that nothing would answer in this particular

case and during this particular session but to be exceedingly wary and

keep clear away from Mr. Trollop; any other course would be fatal."



It seemed that nothing could be done.  Laura was seriously troubled.

Everything was looking well, and yet it was plain that one vigorous and

determined enemy might eventually succeed in overthrowing all her plans.

A suggestion came into her mind presently and she said:



"Can't you fight against his great Pension bill and, bring him to terms?"



"Oh, never; he and I are sworn brothers on that measure; we work in

harness and are very loving--I do everything I possibly can for him

there.  But I work with might and main against his Immigration bill,

--as pertinaciously and as vindictively, indeed, as he works against our

University.  We hate each other through half a conversation and are all

affection through the other half.  We understand each other.  He is an

admirable worker outside the capitol; he will do more for the Pension

bill than any other man could do; I wish he would make the great speech

on it which he wants to make--and then I would make another and we would

be safe."



"Well if he wants to make a great speech why doesn't he do it?"



Visitors interrupted the conversation and Mr. Buckstone took his leave.

It was not of the least moment to Laura that her question had not been

answered, inasmuch as it concerned a thing which did not interest her;

and yet, human being like, she thought she would have liked to know.

An opportunity occurring presently, she put the same question to another

person and got an answer that satisfied her.  She pondered a good while

that night, after she had gone to bed, and when she finally turned over,

to, go to sleep, she had thought out a new scheme.  The next evening at

Mrs. Gloverson's party, she said to Mr. Buckstone:



"I want Mr. Trollop to make his great speech on the Pension bill."



"Do you?  But you remember I was interrupted, and did not explain

to you--"



"Never mind, I know.  You must' make him make that speech.  I very.

particularly desire, it."



"Oh, it is easy, to say make him do it, but how am I to make him!"



"It is perfectly easy; I have thought it all out."



She then went into the details.  At length Mr. Buckstone said:



"I see now.  I can manage it, I am sure.  Indeed I wonder he never

thought of it himself--there are no end of precedents.  But how is this

going to benefit you, after I have managed it?  There is where the

mystery lies."



"But I will take care of that.  It will benefit me a great deal."



"I only wish I could see how; it is the oddest freak.  You seem to go the

furthest around to get at a thing--but you are in earnest, aren't you?"



"Yes I am, indeed."



"Very well, I will do it--but why not tell me how you imagine it is going

to help you?"



"I will, by and by.--Now there is nobody talking to him.  Go straight and

do it, there's a good fellow."



A moment or two later the two sworn friends of the Pension bill were

talking together, earnestly, and seemingly unconscious of the moving

throng about them.  They talked an hour, and then Mr. Buckstone came back

and said:



"He hardly fancied it at first, but he fell in love with it after a bit.

And we have made a compact, too.  I am to keep his secret and he is to

spare me, in future, when he gets ready to denounce the supporters of the

University bill--and I can easily believe he will keep his word on this

occasion."



A fortnight elapsed, and the University bill had gathered to itself many

friends, meantime.  Senator Dilworthy began to think the harvest was

ripe.  He conferred with Laura privately.  She was able to tell him

exactly how the House would vote.  There was a majority--the bill would

pass, unless weak members got frightened at the last, and deserted--a

thing pretty likely to occur.  The Senator said:



"I wish we had one more good strong man.  Now Trollop ought to be on our

side, for he is a friend of the negro.  But he is against us, and is our

bitterest opponent.  If he would simply vote No, but keep quiet and not

molest us, I would feel perfectly cheerful and content.  But perhaps

there is no use in thinking of that."



"Why I laid a little plan for his benefit two weeks ago.  I think he will

be tractable, maybe.  He is to come here tonight."



"Look out for him, my child!  He means mischief, sure.  It is said that

he claims to know of improper practices having been used in the interest

of this bill, and he thinks be sees a chance to make a great sensation

when the bill comes up.  Be wary.  Be very, very careful, my dear.

Do your very-ablest talking, now.  You can convince a man of anything,

when you try.  You must convince him that if anything improper has been

done, you at least are ignorant of it and sorry for it.  And if you could

only persuade him out of his hostility to the bill, too--but don't overdo

the thing; don't seem too anxious, dear."



"I won't; I'll be ever so careful.  I'll talk as sweetly to him as if he

were my own child!  You may trust me--indeed you may."



The door-bell rang.



"That is the gentleman now," said Laura.  Senator Dilworthy retired to

his study.



Laura welcomed Mr. Trollop, a grave, carefully dressed and very

respectable looking man, with a bald head, standing collar and old

fashioned watch seals.



"Promptness is a virtue, Mr. Trollop, and I perceive that you have it.

You are always prompt with me."



"I always meet my engagements, of every kind, Miss Hawkins."



"It is a quality which is rarer in the world than it has been, I believe.

I wished to see you on business, Mr. Trollop."



"I judged so.  What can I do for you?"



"You know my bill--the Knobs University bill?"



"Ah, I believe it is your bill.  I had forgotten.  Yes, I know the bill."



"Well, would you mind telling me your opinion of it?"



"Indeed, since you seem to ask it without reserve, I am obliged to say

that I do not regard it favorably.  I have not seen the bill itself, but

from what I can hear, it--it--well, it has a bad look about it.  It--"



"Speak it out--never fear."



"Well, it--they say it contemplates a fraud upon the government."



"Well?" said Laura tranquilly.



"Well!  I say 'Well?' too."



"Well, suppose it were a fraud--which I feel able to deny--would it be

the first one?"



"You take a body's breath away!  Would you--did you wish me to vote for

it?  Was that what you wanted to see me about?"



"Your instinct is correct.  I did want you--I do want you to vote for

it."



"Vote for a fr--for a measure which is generally believed to be at least

questionable?  I am afraid we cannot come to an understanding, Miss

Hawkins."



"No, I am afraid not--if you have resumed your principles, Mr. Trollop."



"Did you send for we merely to insult me?  It is time for me to take my

leave, Miss Hawkins."



"No-wait a moment.  Don't be offended at a trifle.  Do not be offish and

unsociable.  The Steamship Subsidy bill was a fraud on the government.

You voted for it, Mr. Trollop, though you always opposed the measure

until after you had an interview one evening with a certain Mrs. McCarter

at her house.  She was my agent.  She was acting for me.  Ah, that is

right--sit down again.  You can be sociable, easily enough if you have a

mind to.  Well?  I am waiting.  Have you nothing to say?"



"Miss Hawkins, I voted for that bill because when I came to examine into

it--"



"Ah yes.  When you came to examine into it.  Well, I only want you to

examine into my bill.  Mr. Trollop, you would not sell your vote on that

subsidy bill--which was perfectly right--but you accepted of some

of the stock, with the understanding that it was to stand in your

brother-in-law's name."



"There is no pr--I mean, this is, utterly groundless, Miss Hawkins."  But

the gentleman seemed somewhat uneasy, nevertheless.



"Well, not entirely so, perhaps.  I and a person whom we will call Miss

Blank (never mind the real name,) were in a closet at your elbow all the

while."



Mr. Trollop winced--then he said with dignity:



"Miss Hawkins is it possible that you were capable of such a thing as

that?"



"It was bad; I confess that.  It was bad.  Almost as bad as selling one's

vote for--but I forget; you did not sell your vote--you only accepted a

little trifle, a small token of esteem, for your brother-in-law.  Oh, let

us come out and be frank with each other: I know you, Mr. Trollop.

I have met you on business three or four times; true, I never offered to

corrupt your principles--never hinted such a thing; but always when I had

finished sounding you, I manipulated you through an agent.  Let us be

frank.  Wear this comely disguise of virtue before the public--it will

count there; but here it is out of place.  My dear sir, by and by there

is going to be an investigation into that National Internal Improvement

Directors' Relief Measure of a few years ago, and you know very well that

you will be a crippled man, as likely as not, when it is completed."



"It cannot be shown that a man is a knave merely for owning that stock.

I am not distressed about the National Improvement Relief Measure."



"Oh indeed I am not trying to distress you.  I only wished, to make good

my assertion that I knew you.  Several of you gentlemen bought of that

stack (without paying a penny down) received dividends from it, (think of

the happy idea of receiving dividends, and very large ones, too, from

stock one hasn't paid for!) and all the while your names never appeared

in the transaction; if ever you took the stock at all, you took it in

other people's names.  Now you see, you had to know one of two things;

namely, you either knew that the idea of all this preposterous generosity

was to bribe you into future legislative friendship, or you didn't know

it.  That is to say, you had to be either a knave or a--well, a fool

--there was no middle ground.  You are not a fool, Mr. Trollop."



"Miss Hawking you flatter me.  But seriously, you do not forget that some

of the best and purest men in Congress took that stock in that way?"



"Did Senator Bland?"



"Well, no--I believe not."



"Of course you believe not.  Do you suppose he was ever approached, on

the subject?"



"Perhaps not."



"If you had approached him, for instance, fortified with the fact that

some of the best men in Congress, and the purest, etc., etc.; what would

have been the result?"



"Well, what WOULD have been the result?"



"He would have shown you the door!  For Mr. Blank is neither a knave nor

a fool.  There are other men in the Senate and the House whom no one

would have been hardy enough to approach with that Relief Stock in that

peculiarly generous way, but they are not of the class that you regard as

the best and purest.  No, I say I know you Mr. Trollop.  That is to say,

one may suggest a thing to Mr. Trollop which it would not do to suggest

to Mr. Blank.  Mr. Trollop, you are pledged to support the Indigent

Congressmen's Retroactive Appropriation which is to come up, either in

this or the next session.  You do not deny that, even in public.  The man

that will vote for that bill will break the eighth commandment in any

other way, sir!"



"But he will not vote for your corrupt measure, nevertheless, madam!"

exclaimed Mr. Trollop, rising from his seat in a passion.



"Ah, but he will.  Sit down again, and let me explain why.  Oh, come,

don't behave so.  It is very unpleasant.  Now be good, and you shall

have, the missing page of your great speech.  Here it is!"--and she

displayed a sheet of manuscript.



Mr. Trollop turned immediately back from the threshold.  It might have

been gladness that flashed into his face; it might have been something

else; but at any rate there was much astonishment mixed with it.



"Good!  Where did you get it?  Give it me!"



"Now there is no hurry.  Sit down; sit down and let us talk and be

friendly."



The gentleman wavered.  Then he said:



"No, this is only a subterfuge.  I will go.  It is not the missing page."



Laura tore off a couple of lines from the bottom of the sheet.



"Now," she said, "you will know whether this is the handwriting or not.

You know it is the handwriting.  Now if you will listen, you will know

that this must be the list of statistics which was to be the 'nub' of

your great effort, and the accompanying blast the beginning of the burst

of eloquence which was continued on the next page--and you will recognize

that there was where you broke down."



She read the page.  Mr. Trollop said:



"This is perfectly astounding.  Still, what is all this to me?  It is

nothing.  It does not concern me.  The speech is made, and there an end.

I did break down for a moment, and in a rather uncomfortable place, since

I had led up to those statistics with some grandeur; the hiatus was

pleasanter to the House and the galleries than it was to me.  But it is

no matter now.  A week has passed; the jests about it ceased three or

four days ago.  The, whole thing is a matter of indifference to me, Miss

Hawkins."



"But you apologized; and promised the statistics for next day.  Why

didn't you keep your promise."



"The matter was not of sufficient consequence.  The time was gone by to

produce an effect with them."



"But I hear that other friends of the Soldiers' Pension Bill desire them

very much.  I think you ought to let them have them."



"Miss Hawkins, this silly blunder of my copyist evidently has more

interest for you than it has for me.  I will send my private secretary to

you and let him discuss the subject with you at length."



"Did he copy your speech for you?"



"Of course he did.  Why all these questions?  Tell me--how did you get

hold of that page of manuscript?  That is the only thing that stirs a

passing interest in my mind."



"I'm coming to that."  Then she said, much as if she were talking to

herself: "It does seem like taking a deal of unnecessary pains, for a

body to hire another body to construct a great speech for him and then go

and get still another body to copy it before it can be read in the

House."



"Miss Hawkins, what do yo mean by such talk as that?"



"Why I am sure I mean no harm--no harm to anybody in the world.  I am

certain that I overheard the Hon. Mr. Buckstone either promise to write

your great speech for you or else get some other competent person to do

it."



"This is perfectly absurd, madam, perfectly absurd!" and Mr. Trollop

affected a laugh of derision.



"Why, the thing has occurred before now.  I mean that I have heard that

Congressmen have sometimes hired literary grubs to build speeches for

them.--Now didn't I overhear a conversation like that I spoke of?"



"Pshaw!  Why of course you may have overheard some such jesting nonsense.

But would one be in earnest about so farcical a thing?"



"Well if it was only a joke, why did you make a serious matter of it?

Why did you get the speech written for you, and then read it in the House

without ever having it copied?"



Mr. Trollop did not laugh this time; he seemed seriously perplexed.  He

said:



"Come, play out your jest, Miss Hawkins.  I can't understand what you are

contriving--but it seems to entertain you--so please, go on."



"I will, I assure you; but I hope to make the matter entertaining to you,

too.  Your private secretary never copied your speech."



"Indeed?  Really you seem to know my affairs better than I do myself."



"I believe I do.  You can't name your own amanuensis, Mr. Trollop."



"That is sad, indeed.  Perhaps Miss Hawkins can?"



"Yes, I can.  I wrote your speech myself, and you read it from my

manuscript.  There, now!"



Mr. Trollop did not spring to his feet and smite his brow with his hand

while a cold sweat broke out all over him and the color forsook his face

--no, he only said, "Good God!" and looked greatly astonished.



Laura handed him her commonplace-book and called his attention to the

fact that the handwriting there and the handwriting of this speech were

the same.  He was shortly convinced.  He laid the book aside and said,

composedly:



"Well, the wonderful tragedy is done, and it transpires that I am

indebted to you for my late eloquence.  What of it?  What was all this

for and what does it amount to after all?  What do you propose to do

about it?"



"Oh nothing.  It is only a bit of pleasantry.  When I overheard that

conversation I took an early opportunity to ask Mr. Buckstone if he knew

of anybody who might want a speech written--I had a friend, and so forth

and so on.  I was the friend, myself; I thought I might do you a good

turn then and depend on you to do me one by and by.  I never let Mr.

Buckstone have the speech till the last moment, and when you hurried off

to the House with it, you did not know there was a missing page, of

course, but I did.



"And now perhaps you think that if I refuse to support your bill, you

will make a grand exposure?"



"Well I had not thought of that.  I only kept back the page for the mere

fun of the thing; but since you mention it, I don't know but I might do

something if I were angry."



"My dear Miss Hawkins, if you were to give out that you composed my

speech, you know very well that people would say it was only your

raillery, your fondness for putting a victim in the pillory and amusing

the public at his expense.  It is too flimsy, Miss Hawkins, for a person

of your fine inventive talent--contrive an abler device than that.

Come!"



"It is easily done, Mr. Trollop.  I will hire a man, and pin this page on

his breast, and label it, 'The Missing Fragment of the Hon. Mr. Trollop's

Great Speech--which speech was written and composed by Miss Laura Hawkins

under a secret understanding for one hundred dollars--and the money has

not been paid.'  And I will pin round about it notes in my handwriting,

which I will procure from prominent friends of mine for the occasion;

also your printed speech in the Globe, showing the connection between its

bracketed hiatus and my Fragment; and I give you my word of honor that I

will stand that human bulletin board in the rotunda of the capitol and

make him stay there a week!  You see you are premature, Mr. Trollop, the

wonderful tragedy is not done yet, by any means.  Come, now, doesn't it

improve?"



Mr Trollop opened his eyes rather widely at this novel aspect of the

case.  He got up and walked the floor and gave himself a moment for

reflection.  Then he stopped and studied Laura's face a while, and ended

by saying:



"Well, I am obliged to believe you would be reckless enough to do that."



"Then don't put me to the test, Mr. Trollop.  But let's drop the matter.

I have had my joke and you've borne the infliction becomingly enough.

It spoils a jest to harp on it after one has had one's laugh.  I would

much rather talk about my bill."



"So would I, now, my clandestine amanuensis.  Compared with some other

subjects, even your bill is a pleasant topic to discuss."



"Very good indeed!  I thought.  I could persuade you.  Now I am sure you

will be generous to the poor negro and vote for that bill."



"Yes, I feel more tenderly toward the oppressed colored man than I did.

Shall we bury the hatchet and be good friends and respect each other's

little secrets, on condition that I vote Aye on the measure?"



"With all my heart, Mr. Trollop.  I give you my word of that."



"It is a bargain.  But isn't there something else you could give me,

too?"



Laura looked at him inquiringly a moment, and then she comprehended.



"Oh, yes!  You may have it now.  I haven't any, more use for it."  She

picked up the page of manuscript, but she reconsidered her intention of

handing it to him, and said, "But never mind; I will keep it close; no

one shall see it; you shall have it as soon as your vote is recorded."



Mr. Trollop looked disappointed.  But presently made his adieux, and had

got as far as the hall, when something occurred to Laura.  She said to

herself, "I don't simply want his vote under compulsion--he might vote

aye, but work against the bill in secret, for revenge; that man is

unscrupulous enough to do anything.  I must have his hearty co-operation

as well as his vote.  There is only one way to get that."



She called him back, and said:



"I value your vote, Mr. Trollop, but I value your influence more.  You

are able to help a measure along in many ways, if you choose.  I want to

ask you to work for the bill as well as vote for it."



"It takes so much of one's time, Miss Hawkins--and time is money, you

know."



"Yes, I know it is--especially in Congress.  Now there is no use in you

and I dealing in pretenses and going at matters in round-about ways.

We know each other--disguises are nonsense.  Let us be plain.  I will

make it an object to you to work for the bill."



"Don't make it unnecessarily plain, please.  There are little proprieties

that are best preserved.  What do you propose?"



"Well, this."  She mentioned the names of several prominent Congressmen.



"Now," said she, "these gentlemen are to vote and work for the bill,

simply out of love for the negro--and out of pure generosity I have put

in a relative of each as a member of the University incorporation.  They

will handle a million or so of money, officially, but will receive no

salaries.  A larger number of statesmen are to, vote and work for the

bill--also out of love for the negro--gentlemen of but moderate

influence, these--and out of pure generosity I am to see that relatives

of theirs have positions in the University, with salaries, and good ones,

too.  You will vote and work for the bill, from mere affection for the

negro, and I desire to testify my gratitude becomingly.  Make free

choice.  Have you any friend whom you would like to present with a

salaried or unsalaried position in our institution?"



"Well, I have a brother-in-law--"



"That same old brother-in-law, you good unselfish provider!  I have heard

of him often, through my agents.  How regularly he does 'turn up,' to be

sure.  He could deal with those millions virtuously, and withal with

ability, too--but of course you would rather he had a salaried position?"



"Oh, no," said the gentleman, facetiously, "we are very humble, very

humble in our desires; we want no money; we labor solely, for our country

and require no reward but the luxury of an applauding conscience.  Make

him one of those poor hard working unsalaried corporators and let him do

every body good with those millions--and go hungry himself!  I will try

to exert a little influence in favor of the bill."



Arrived at home, Mr. Trollop sat down and thought it all over--something

after this fashion: it is about the shape it might have taken if he had

spoken it aloud.



"My reputation is getting a little damaged, and I meant to clear it up

brilliantly with an exposure of this bill at the supreme moment, and ride

back into Congress on the eclat of it; and if I had that bit of

manuscript, I would do it yet.  It would be more money in my pocket in

the end, than my brother-in-law will get out of that incorporatorship,

fat as it is.  But that sheet of paper is out of my reach--she will never

let that get out of her hands.  And what a mountain it is!  It blocks up

my road, completely.  She was going to hand it to me, once.  Why didn't

she!  Must be a deep woman.  Deep devil!  That is what she is;

a beautiful devil--and perfectly fearless, too.  The idea of her pinning

that paper on a man and standing him up in the rotunda looks absurd at a

first glance.  But she would do it!  She is capable of doing anything.

I went there hoping she would try to bribe me--good solid capital that

would be in the exposure.  Well, my prayer was answered; she did try to

bribe me; and I made the best of a bad bargain and let her.  I am

check-mated.  I must contrive something fresh to get back to Congress on.

Very well; a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush; I will work for

the bill--the incorporatorship will be a very good thing."



As soon as Mr. Trollop had taken his leave, Laura ran to Senator

Dilworthy and began to speak, but he interrupted her and said

distressfully, without even turning from his writing to look at her:



"Only half an hour!  You gave it up early, child.  However, it was best,

it was best--I'm sure it was best--and safest."



"Give it up!  I!"



The Senator sprang up, all aglow:



"My child, you can't mean that you--"



"I've made him promise on honor to think about a compromise tonight and

come and tell me his decision in the morning."



"Good!  There's hope yet that--"



Nonsense, uncle.  I've made him engage to let the Tennessee Land bill

utterly alone!"



"Impossible!  You--"



"I've made him promise to vote with us!"



"INCREDIBLE!  Abso--"



"I've made him swear that he'll work for us!"



"PRE - - - POSTEROUS!--Utterly pre--break a window, child, before I

suffocate!"



"No matter, it's true anyway.  Now we can march into Congress with drums

beating and colors flying!"



"Well--well--well.  I'm sadly bewildered, sadly bewildered.  I can't

understand it at all--the most extraordinary woman that ever--it's a

great day, it's a great day.  There--there--let me put my hand in

benediction on this precious head.  Ah, my child, the poor negro will

bless--"



"Oh bother the poor negro, uncle!  Put it in your speech.  Good-night,

good-bye--we'll marshal our forces and march with the dawn!"



Laura reflected a while, when she was alone, and then fell to laughing,

peacefully.



"Everybody works for me,"--so ran her thought.  "It was a good idea to

make Buckstone lead Mr. Trollop on to get a great speech written for him;

and it was a happy part of the same idea for me to copy the speech after

Mr. Buckstone had written it, and then keep back a page.  Mr. B.  was

very complimentary to me when Trollop's break-down in the House showed

him the object of my mysterious scheme; I think he will say, still finer

things when I tell him the triumph the sequel to it has gained for us.



"But what a coward the man was, to believe I would have exposed that page

in the rotunda, and so exposed myself.  However, I don't know--I don't

know.  I will think a moment.  Suppose he voted no; suppose the bill

failed; that is to suppose this stupendous game lost forever, that I have

played so desperately for; suppose people came around pitying me--odious!

And he could have saved me by his single voice.  Yes, I would have

exposed him!  What would I care for the talk that that would have made

about me when I was gone to Europe with Selby and all the world was busy

with my history and my dishonor?  It would be almost happiness to spite

somebody at such a time."









CHAPTER XLIII.



The very next day, sure enough, the campaign opened.  In due course, the

Speaker of the House reached that Order of Business which is termed

"Notices of Bills," and then the Hon. Mr. Buckstone rose in his place and

gave notice of a bill "To Found and Incorporate the Knobs Industrial

University," and then sat down without saying anything further.  The busy

gentlemen in the reporters' gallery jotted a line in their note-books,

ran to the telegraphic desk in a room which communicated with their own

writing-parlor, and then hurried back to their places in the gallery; and

by the time they had resumed their seats, the line which they had

delivered to the operator had been read in telegraphic offices in towns

and cities hundreds of miles away.  It was distinguished by frankness of

language as well as by brevity:



"The child is born.  Buckstone gives notice of the thieving Knobs

University job.  It is said the noses have been counted and enough votes

have been bought to pass it."



For some time the correspondents had been posting their several journals

upon the alleged disreputable nature of the bill, and furnishing daily

reports of the Washington gossip concerning it.  So the next morning,

nearly every newspaper of character in the land assailed the measure and

hurled broadsides of invective at Mr. Buckstone.  The Washington papers

were more respectful, as usual--and conciliatory, also, as usual.  They

generally supported measures, when it was possible; but when they could

not they "deprecated" violent expressions of opinion in other

journalistic quarters.



They always deprecated, when there was trouble ahead.  However, 'The

Washington Daily Love-Feast' hailed the bill with warm approbation.  This

was Senator Balaam's paper--or rather, "Brother" Balaam, as he was

popularly called, for he had been a clergyman, in his day; and he himself

and all that he did still emitted an odor of sanctity now that he had

diverged into journalism and politics.  He was a power in the

Congressional prayer meeting, and in all movements that looked to the

spread of religion and temperance.



His paper supported the new bill with gushing affection; it was a noble

measure; it was a just measure; it was a generous measure; it was a pure

measure, and that surely should recommend it in these corrupt times; and

finally, if the nature of the bill were not known at all, the 'Love

Feast' would support it anyway, and unhesitatingly, for the fact that

Senator Dilworthy was the originator of the measure was a guaranty that

it contemplated a worthy and righteous work.



Senator Dilworthy was so anxious to know what the New York papers would

say about the bill; that he had arranged to have synopses of their

editorials telegraphed to him; he could not wait for the papers

themselves to crawl along down to Washington by a mail train which has

never run over a cow since the road was built; for the reason that it has

never been able to overtake one.  It carries the usual "cow-catcher" in

front of the locomotive, but this is mere ostentation.  It ought to be

attached to the rear car, where it could do some good; but instead, no

provision is made there for the protection of the traveling public, and

hence it is not a matter of surprise that cows so frequently climb aboard

that train and among the passengers.



The Senator read his dispatches aloud at the breakfast table.  Laura was

troubled beyond measure at their tone, and said that that sort of comment

would defeat the bill; but the Senator said:



"Oh, not at all, not at all, my child.  It is just what we want.

Persecution is the one thing needful, now--all the other forces are

secured.  Give us newspaper persecution enough, and we are safe.

Vigorous persecution will alone carry a bill sometimes, dear; and when

you start with a strong vote in the first place, persecution comes in

with double effect.  It scares off some of the weak supporters, true,

but it soon turns strong ones into stubborn ones.  And then, presently,

it changes the tide of public opinion.  The great public is weak-minded;

the great public is sentimental; the great public always turns around and

weeps for an odious murderer, and prays for-him, and carries flowers to

his prison and besieges the governor with appeals to his clemency, as

soon as the papers begin to howl for that man's blood.--In a word, the

great putty-hearted public loves to 'gush,' and there is no such darling

opportunity to gush as a case of persecution affords."



"Well, uncle, dear; if your theory is right, let us go into raptures,

for nobody can ask a heartier persecution than these editorials are

furnishing."



"I am not so sure of that, my daughter.  I don't entirely like the tone

of some of these remarks.  They lack vim, they lack venom.  Here is one

calls it a 'questionable measure.'  Bah, there is no strength in that.

This one is better; it calls it 'highway robbery.'  That sounds something

like.  But now this one seems satisfied to call it an 'iniquitous

scheme'.  'Iniquitous' does not exasperate anybody; it is weak--puerile.

The ignorant will imagine it to be intended for a compliment.  But this

other one--the one I read last--has the true ring: 'This vile, dirty

effort to rob the public treasury, by the kites and vultures that now

infest the filthy den called Congress'--that is admirable, admirable!

We must have more of that sort.  But it will come--no fear of that;

they're not warmed up, yet.  A week from now you'll see."



"Uncle, you and Brother Balaam are bosom friends--why don't you get his

paper to persecute us, too?"



"It isn't worth while, my, daughter.  His support doesn't hurt a bill.

Nobody reads his editorials but himself.  But I wish the New York papers

would talk a little plainer.  It is annoying to have to wait a week for

them to warm up.  I expected better things at their hands--and time is

precious, now."



At the proper hour, according to his previous notice, Mr. Buckstone duly

introduced his bill entitled "An Act to Found and Incorporate the Knobs

Industrial University," moved its proper reference, and sat down.



The Speaker of the House rattled off this observation:



"'Fnobjectionbilltakuzhlcoixrssoreferred!'"



Habitues of the House comprehended that this long, lightning-heeled word

signified that if there was no objection, the bill would take the

customary course of a measure of its nature, and be referred to the

Committee on Benevolent Appropriations, and that it was accordingly so

referred.  Strangers merely supposed that the Speaker was taking a gargle

for some affection of the throat.



The reporters immediately telegraphed the introduction of the bill.--And

they added:



     "The assertion that the bill will pass was premature.  It is said

     that many favorers of it will desert when the storm breaks upon them

     from the public press."



The storm came, and during ten days it waxed more and more violent day by

day.  The great "Negro University Swindle" became the one absorbing topic

of conversation throughout the Union.  Individuals denounced it, journals

denounced it, public meetings denounced it, the pictorial papers

caricatured its friends, the whole nation seemed to be growing frantic

over it.  Meantime the Washington correspondents were sending such

telegrams as these abroad in the land; Under date of--



SATURDAY.  "Congressmen Jex and Fluke are wavering; it is believed they

will desert the execrable bill."



MONDAY.  "Jex and Fluke have deserted!"



THURSDAY.  "Tubbs and Huffy left the sinking ship last night"



Later on:



"Three desertions.  The University thieves are getting scared, though

they will not own it."



Later:



"The leaders are growing stubborn--they swear they can carry it, but it

is now almost certain that they no longer have a majority!"



After a day or two of reluctant and ambiguous telegrams:



"Public sentiment seems changing, a trifle in favor of the bill

--but only a trifle."



And still later:



"It is whispered that the Hon. Mr. Trollop has gone over to the pirates.

It is probably a canard.  Mr. Trollop has all along been the bravest and

most efficient champion of virtue and the people against the bill, and

the report is without doubt a shameless invention."



Next day:



"With characteristic treachery, the truckling and pusillanimous reptile,

Crippled-Speech Trollop, has gone over to the enemy.  It is contended,

now, that he has been a friend to the bill, in secret, since the day it

was introduced, and has had bankable reasons for being so; but he himself

declares that he has gone over because the malignant persecution of the

bill by the newspapers caused him to study its provisions with more care

than he had previously done, and this close examination revealed the fact

that the measure is one in every way worthy of support.  (Pretty thin!)

It cannot be denied that this desertion has had a damaging effect.  Jex

and Fluke have returned to their iniquitous allegiance, with six or eight

others of lesser calibre, and it is reported and believed that Tubbs and

Huffy are ready to go back.  It is feared that the University swindle is

stronger to-day than it has ever been before."



Later-midnight:



"It is said that the committee will report the bill back to-morrow.  Both

sides are marshaling their forces, and the fight on this bill is

evidently going to be the hottest of the session.--All Washington is

boiling."









CHAPTER XLIV.



"It's easy enough for another fellow to talk," said Harry, despondingly,

after he had put Philip in possession of his view of the case.  "It's

easy enough to say 'give her up,' if you don't care for her.  What am I

going to do to give her up?"



It seemed to Harry that it was a situation requiring some active

measures.  He couldn't realize that he had fallen hopelessly in love

without some rights accruing to him for the possession of the object of

his passion.  Quiet resignation under relinquishment of any thing he

wanted was not in his line.  And when it appeared to him that his

surrender of Laura would be the withdrawal of the one barrier that kept

her from ruin, it was unreasonable to expect that he could see how to

give her up.



Harry had the most buoyant confidence in his own projects always; he saw

everything connected with himself in a large way and in rosy lines.  This

predominance of the imagination over the judgment gave that appearance of

exaggeration to his conversation and to his communications with regard to

himself, which sometimes conveyed the impression that he was not speaking

the truth.  His acquaintances had been known to say that they invariably

allowed a half for shrinkage in his statements, and held the other half

under advisement for confirmation.



Philip in this case could not tell from Harry's story exactly how much

encouragement Laura had given him, nor what hopes he might justly have of

winning her.  He had never seen him desponding before.  The "brag"

appeared to be all taken out of him, and his airy manner only asserted

itself now and then in a comical imitation of its old self.



Philip wanted time to look about him before he decided what to do.

He was not familiar with Washington, and it was difficult to adjust his

feelings and perceptions to its peculiarities.  Coming out of the sweet

sanity of the Bolton household, this was by contrast the maddest Vanity

Fair one could conceive.  It seemed to him a feverish, unhealthy

atmosphere in which lunacy would be easily developed.  He fancied that

everybody attached to himself an exaggerated importance, from the fact of

being at the national capital, the center of political influence, the

fountain of patronage, preferment, jobs and opportunities.



People were introduced to each other as from this or that state, not from

cities or towns, and this gave a largeness to their representative

feeling.  All the women talked politics as naturally and glibly as they

talk fashion or literature elsewhere.  There was always some exciting

topic at the Capitol, or some huge slander was rising up like a miasmatic

exhalation from the Potomac, threatening to settle no one knew exactly

where.  Every other person was an aspirant for a place, or, if he had

one, for a better place, or more pay; almost every other one had some

claim or interest or remedy to urge; even the women were all advocates

for the advancement of some person, and they violently espoused or

denounced this or that measure as it would affect some relative,

acquaintance or friend.



Love, travel, even death itself, waited on the chances of the dies daily

thrown in the two Houses, and the committee rooms there.  If the measure

went through, love could afford to ripen into marriage, and longing for

foreign travel would have fruition; and it must have been only eternal

hope springing in the breast that kept alive numerous old claimants who

for years and years had besieged the doors of Congress, and who looked as

if they needed not so much an appropriation of money as six feet of

ground.  And those who stood so long waiting for success to bring them

death were usually those who had a just claim.



Representing states and talking of national and even international

affairs, as familiarly as neighbors at home talk of poor crops and the

extravagance of their ministers, was likely at first to impose upon

Philip as to the importance of the people gathered here.



There was a little newspaper editor from Phil's native town, the

assistant on a Peddletonian weekly, who made his little annual joke about

the "first egg laid on our table," and who was the menial of every

tradesman in the village and under bonds to him for frequent "puffs,"

except the undertaker, about whose employment he was recklessly

facetious.  In Washington he was an important man, correspondent, and

clerk of two house committees, a "worker" in politics, and a confident

critic of every woman and every man in Washington.  He would be a consul

no doubt by and by, at some foreign port, of the language of which he was

ignorant--though if ignorance of language were a qualification he might

have been a consul at home.  His easy familiarity with great men was

beautiful to see, and when Philip learned what a tremendous underground

influence this little ignoramus had, he no longer wondered at the queer

appointments and the queerer legislation.



Philip was not long in discovering that people in Washington did not

differ much from other people; they had the same meannesses,

generosities, and tastes: A Washington boarding house had the odor of a

boarding house the world over.



Col. Sellers was as unchanged as any one Philip saw whom he had known

elsewhere.  Washington appeared to be the native element of this man.

His pretentions were equal to any he encountered there.  He saw nothing

in its society that equalled that of Hawkeye, he sat down to no table

that could not be unfavorably contrasted with his own at home; the most

airy scheme inflated in the hot air of the capital only reached in

magnitude some of his lesser fancies, the by-play of his constructive

imagination.



"The country is getting along very well," he said to Philip, "but our

public men are too timid.  What we want is more money.  I've told

Boutwell so.  Talk about basing the currency on gold; you might as well

base it on pork.  Gold is only one product.  Base it on everything!

You've got to do something for the West.  How am I to move my crops?

We must have improvements.  Grant's got the idea.  We want a canal from

the James River to the Mississippi.  Government ought to build it."



It was difficult to get the Colonel off from these large themes when he

was once started, but Philip brought the conversation round to Laura and

her reputation in the City.



"No," he said, "I haven't noticed much.  We've been so busy about this

University.  It will make Laura rich with the rest of us, and she has

done nearly as much as if she were a man.  She has great talent, and will

make a big match.  I see the foreign ministers and that sort after her.

Yes, there is talk, always will be about a pretty woman so much in public

as she is.  Tough stories come to me, but I put'em away.  'Taint likely

one of Si Hawkins's children would do that--for she is the same as a

child of his.  I told her, though, to go slow," added the Colonel, as if

that mysterious admonition from him would set everything right.



"Do you know anything about a Col. Selby?"



"Know all about him.  Fine fellow.  But he's got a wife; and I told him,

as a friend, he'd better sheer off from Laura.  I reckon he thought

better of it and did."



But Philip was not long in learning the truth.  Courted as Laura was by a

certain class and still admitted into society, that, nevertheless, buzzed

with disreputable stories about her, she had lost character with the best

people.  Her intimacy with Selby was open gossip, and there were winks

and thrustings of the tongue in any group of men when she passed by.

It was clear enough that Harry's delusion must be broken up, and that no

such feeble obstacle as his passion could interpose would turn Laura from

her fate.  Philip determined to see her, and put himself in possession of

the truth, as he suspected it, in order to show Harry his folly.



Laura, after her last conversation with Harry, had a new sense of her

position.  She had noticed before the signs of a change in manner towards

her, a little less respect perhaps from men, and an avoidance by women.

She had attributed this latter partly to jealousy of her, for no one is

willing to acknowledge a fault in himself when a more agreeable motive

can be found for the estrangement of his acquaintances.  But now, if

society had turned on her, she would defy it.  It was not in her nature

to shrink.  She knew she had been wronged, and she knew that she had no

remedy.



What she heard of Col. Selby's proposed departure alarmed her more than

anything else, and she calmly determined that if he was deceiving her the

second time it should be the last.  Let society finish the tragedy if it

liked; she was indifferent what came after.  At the first opportunity,

she charged Selby with his intention to abandon her.  He unblushingly

denied it.



He had not thought of going to Europe.  He had only been amusing himself

with Sellers' schemes.  He swore that as soon as she succeeded with her

bill, he would fly with her to any part of the world.



She did not quite believe him, for she saw that he feared her, and she

began to suspect that his were the protestations of a coward to gain

time.  But she showed him no doubts.



She only watched his movements day by day, and always held herself ready

to act promptly.



When Philip came into the presence of this attractive woman, he could not

realize that she was the subject of all the scandal he had heard.  She

received him with quite the old Hawkeye openness and cordiality, and fell

to talking at once of their little acquaintance there; and it seemed

impossible that he could ever say to her what he had come determined to

say.  Such a man as Philip has only one standard by which to judge women.



Laura recognized that fact no doubt.  The better part of her woman's

nature saw it.  Such a man might, years ago, not now, have changed her

nature, and made the issue of her life so different, even after her cruel

abandonment.  She had a dim feeling of this, and she would like now to

stand well with him.  The spark of truth and honor that was left in her

was elicited by his presence.  It was this influence that governed her

conduct in this interview.



"I have come," said Philip in his direct manner, "from my friend

Mr. Brierly.  You are not ignorant of his feeling towards you?"



"Perhaps not."



"But perhaps you do not know, you who have so much admiration, how

sincere and overmastering his love is for you?"  Philip would not have

spoken so plainly, if he had in mind anything except to draw from Laura

something that would end Harry's passion.



"And is sincere love so rare, Mr. Sterling?" asked Laura, moving her foot

a little, and speaking with a shade of sarcasm.



"Perhaps not in Washington," replied Philip,--tempted into a similar

tone.  "Excuse my bluntness," he continued, "but would the knowledge of

his love; would his devotion, make any difference to you in your

Washington life?"



"In respect to what?" asked Laura quickly.



"Well, to others.  I won't equivocate--to Col. Selby?"



Laura's face flushed with anger, or shame; she looked steadily at Philip

and began,



"By what right, sir,--"



"By the right of friendship," interrupted Philip stoutly.  "It may matter

little to you.  It is everything to him.  He has a Quixotic notion that

you would turn back from what is before you for his sake.  You cannot be

ignorant of what all the city is talking of."  Philip said this

determinedly and with some bitterness.



It was a full minute before Laura spoke.  Both had risen, Philip as if to

go, and Laura in suppressed excitement.  When she spoke her voice was

very unsteady, and she looked down.



"Yes, I know.  I perfectly understand what you mean.  Mr. Brierly is

nothing--simply nothing.  He is a moth singed, that is all--the trifler

with women thought he was a wasp.  I have no pity for him, not the least.

You may tell him not to make a fool of himself, and to keep away.  I say

this on your account, not his.  You are not like him.  It is enough for

me that you want it so.  Mr. Sterling," she continued, looking up; and

there were tears in her eyes that contradicted the hardness of her

language, "you might not pity him if you knew my history; perhaps you

would not wonder at some things you hear.  No; it is useless to ask me

why it must be so.  You can't make a life over--society wouldn't let you

if you would--and mine must be lived as it is.  There, sir, I'm not

offended; but it is useless for you to say anything more."



Philip went away with his heart lightened about Harry, but profoundly

saddened by the glimpse of what this woman might have been.  He told

Harry all that was necessary of the conversation--she was bent on going

her own way, he had not the ghost of a chance--he was a fool, she had

said, for thinking he had.



And Harry accepted it meekly, and made up his own mind that Philip didn't

know much about women.









CHAPTER XLV.



The galleries of the House were packed, on the momentous day, not because

the reporting of an important bill back by a committee was a thing to be

excited about, if the bill were going to take the ordinary course

afterward; it would be like getting excited over the empaneling of a

coroner's jury in a murder case, instead of saving up one's emotions for

the grander occasion of the hanging of the accused, two years later,

after all the tedious forms of law had been gone through with.



But suppose you understand that this coroner's jury is going to turn out

to be a vigilance committee in disguise, who will hear testimony for an

hour and then hang the murderer on the spot?  That puts a different

aspect upon the matter.  Now it was whispered that the legitimate forms

of procedure usual in the House, and which keep a bill hanging along for

days and even weeks, before it is finally passed upon, were going to be

overruled, in this case, and short work made of the, measure; and so,

what was beginning as a mere inquest might, torn out to be something very

different.



In the course of the day's business the Order of "Reports of Committees"

was finally reached and when the weary crowds heard that glad

announcement issue from the Speaker's lips they ceased to fret at the

dragging delay, and plucked up spirit.  The Chairman of the Committee on

Benevolent Appropriations rose and made his report, and just then a

blue-uniformed brass-mounted little page put a note into his hand.



It was from Senator Dilworthy, who had appeared upon the floor of the

House for a moment and flitted away again:



     "Everybody expects a grand assault in force; no doubt you believe,

     as I certainly do, that it is the thing to do; we are strong, and

     everything is hot for the contest.  Trollop's espousal of our cause

     has immensely helped us and we grow in power constantly.  Ten of the

     opposition were called away from town about noon,(but--so it is

     said--only for one day).  Six others are sick, but expect to be

     about again tomorrow or next day, a friend tells me.  A bold

     onslaught is worth trying.  Go for a suspension of the rules!  You

     will find we can swing a two-thirds vote--I am perfectly satisfied

     of it.  The Lord's truth will prevail.

                                                  "DILWORTHY."



Mr. Buckstone had reported the bills from his committee, one by one,

leaving the bill to the last.  When the House had voted upon the

acceptance or rejection of the report upon all but it, and the question

now being upon its disposal--Mr. Buckstone begged that the House would

give its attention to a few remarks which he desired to make.  His

committee had instructed him to report the bill favorably; he wished to

explain the nature of the measure, and thus justify the committee's

action; the hostility roused by the press would then disappear, and the

bill would shine forth in its true and noble character.  He said that its

provisions were simple.  It incorporated the Knobs Industrial University,

locating it in East Tennessee, declaring it open to all persons without

distinction of sex, color or religion, and committing its management to a

board of perpetual trustees, with power to fill vacancies in their own

number.  It provided for the erection of certain buildings for the

University, dormitories, lecture-halls, museums, libraries, laboratories,

work-shops, furnaces, and mills.  It provided also for the purchase of

sixty-five thousand acres of land, (fully described) for the purposes of

the University, in the Knobs of East Tennessee.  And it appropriated

[blank] dollars for the purchase of the Land, which should be the

property of the national trustees in trust for the uses named.



Every effort had been made to secure the refusal of the whole amount of

the property of the Hawkins heirs in the Knobs, some seventy-five

thousand acres Mr. Buckstone said.  But Mr. Washington Hawkins (one of

the heirs) objected.  He was, indeed, very reluctant to sell any part of

the land at any price; and indeed--this reluctance was justifiable when

one considers how constantly and how greatly the property is rising in

value.



What the South needed, continued Mr. Buckstone, was skilled labor.

Without that it would be unable to develop its mines, build its roads,

work to advantage and without great waste its fruitful land, establish

manufactures or enter upon a prosperous industrial career.  Its laborers

were almost altogether unskilled.  Change them into intelligent, trained

workmen, and you increased at once the capital, the resources of the

entire south, which would enter upon a prosperity hitherto unknown.

In five years the increase in local wealth would not only reimburse the

government for the outlay in this appropriation, but pour untold wealth

into the treasury.



This was the material view, and the least important in the honorable

gentleman's opinion.  [Here he referred to some notes furnished him by

Senator Dilworthy, and then continued.] God had given us the care of

these colored millions.  What account should we render to Him of our

stewardship?  We had made them free.  Should we leave them ignorant?

We had cast them upon their own resources.  Should we leave them without

tools?  We could not tell what the intentions of Providence are in regard

to these peculiar people, but our duty was plain.  The Knobs Industrial

University would be a vast school of modern science and practice, worthy

of a great nation.  It would combine the advantages of Zurich, Freiburg,

Creuzot and the Sheffield Scientific.  Providence had apparently reserved

and set apart the Knobs of East Tennessee for this purpose.  What else

were they for?  Was it not wonderful that for more than thirty years,

over a generation, the choicest portion of them had remained in one

family, untouched, as if, separated for some great use!



It might be asked why the government should buy this land, when it had

millions of yes, more than the railroad companies desired, which, it

might devote to this purpose?  He answered, that the government had no

such tract of land as this.  It had nothing comparable to it for the

purposes of the University: This was to be a school of mining, of

engineering, of the working of metals, of chemistry, zoology, botany,

manufactures, agriculture, in short of all the complicated industries

that make a state great.  There was no place for the location of such a

school like the Knobs of East Tennessee.  The hills abounded in metals of

all sorts, iron in all its combinations, copper, bismuth, gold and silver

in small quantities, platinum he--believed, tin, aluminium; it was

covered with forests and strange plants; in the woods were found the

coon, the opossum, the fox, the deer and many other animals who roamed in

the domain of natural history; coal existed in enormous quantity and no

doubt oil; it was such a place for the practice of agricultural

experiments that any student who had been successful there would have an

easy task in any other portion of the country.



No place offered equal facilities for experiments in mining, metallurgy,

engineering.  He expected to live to see the day, when the youth of the

south would resort to its mines, its workshops, its laboratories, its

furnaces and factories for practical instruction in all the great

industrial pursuits.



A noisy and rather ill-natured debate followed, now, and lasted hour

after hour.  The friends of the bill were instructed by the leaders to

make no effort to check it; it was deemed better strategy to tire out the

opposition; it was decided to vote down every proposition to adjourn, and

so continue the sitting into the night; opponents might desert, then, one

by one and weaken their party, for they had no personal stake in the

bill.



Sunset came, and still the fight went on; the gas was lit, the crowd in

the galleries began to thin, but the contest continued; the crowd

returned, by and by, with hunger and thirst appeased, and aggravated the

hungry and thirsty House by looking contented and comfortable; but still

the wrangle lost nothing of its bitterness.  Recesses were moved

plaintively by the opposition, and invariably voted down by the

University army.



At midnight the House presented a spectacle calculated to interest a

stranger.  The great galleries were still thronged--though only with men,

now; the bright colors that had made them look like hanging gardens were

gone, with the ladies.  The reporters' gallery, was merely occupied by

one or two watchful sentinels of the quill-driving guild; the main body

cared nothing for a debate that had dwindled to a mere vaporing of dull

speakers and now and then a brief quarrel over a point of order; but

there was an unusually large attendance of journalists in the reporters'

waiting-room, chatting, smoking, and keeping on the 'qui vive' for the

general irruption of the Congressional volcano that must come when the

time was ripe for it.  Senator Dilworthy and Philip were in the

Diplomatic Gallery; Washington sat in the public gallery, and Col.

Sellers was, not far away.  The Colonel had been flying about the

corridors and button-holing Congressmen all the evening, and believed

that he had accomplished a world of valuable service; but fatigue was

telling upon him, now, and he was quiet and speechless--for once.  Below,

a few Senators lounged upon the sofas set apart for visitors, and talked

with idle Congressmen.  A dreary member was speaking; the presiding

officer was nodding; here and there little knots of members stood in the

aisles, whispering together; all about the House others sat in all the

various attitudes that express weariness; some, tilted back, had one or

more legs disposed upon their desks; some sharpened pencils indolently;

some scribbled aimlessly; some yawned and stretched; a great many lay

upon their breasts upon the desks, sound asleep and gently snoring.

The flooding gaslight from the fancifully wrought roof poured down upon

the tranquil scene.  Hardly a sound disturbed the stillness, save the

monotonous eloquence of the gentleman who occupied the floor.  Now and

then a warrior of the opposition broke down under the pressure, gave it

up, and went home.



Mr. Buckstone began to think it might be safe, now, to "proceed to

business."  He consulted with Trollop and one or two others.  Senator

Dilworthy descended to the floor of the House and they went to meet him.

After a brief comparison of notes, the Congressmen sought their seats and

sent pages about the House with messages to friends.  These latter

instantly roused up, yawned, and began to look alert.  The moment the

floor was unoccupied, Mr. Buckstone rose, with an injured look, and said

it was evident that the opponents of the bill were merely talking against

time, hoping in this unbecoming way to tire out the friends of the

measure and so defeat it.  Such conduct might be respectable enough in a

village debating society, but it was trivial among statesmen, it was out

of place in so august an assemblage as the House of Representatives of

the United States.  The friends of the bill had been not only willing

that its opponents should express their opinions, but had strongly

desired it.  They courted the fullest and freest discussion; but it

seemed to him that this fairness was but illy appreciated, since

gentlemen were capable of taking advantage of it for selfish and unworthy

ends.  This trifling had gone far enough.  He called for the question.



The instant Mr. Buckstone sat down, the storm burst forth.  A dozen

gentlemen sprang to their feet.



"Mr. Speaker!"



"Mr. Speaker!"



"Mr. Speaker!"



"Order!  Order!  Order!  Question!  Question!"



The sharp blows of the Speaker's gavel rose above the din.



The "previous question," that hated gag, was moved and carried.  All

debate came to a sudden end, of course.  Triumph No. 1.



Then the vote was taken on the adoption of the report and it carried by a

surprising majority.



Mr. Buckstone got the floor again and moved that the rules be suspended

and the bill read a first time.



Mr. Trollop--"Second the motion!"



The Speaker--"It is moved and--"



Clamor of Voices.  "Move we adjourn!  Second the motion!  Adjourn!

Adjourn!  Order!  Order!"



The Speaker, (after using his gavel vigorously)--"It is moved and

seconded that the House do now adjourn.  All those in favor--"



Voices--"Division!  Division!  Ayes and nays!  Ayes and nays!"



It was decided to vote upon the adjournment by ayes and nays.  This was

in earnest.  The excitement was furious.  The galleries were in commotion

in an instant, the reporters swarmed to their places. Idling members of

the House flocked to their seats, nervous gentlemen sprang to their feet,

pages flew hither and thither, life and animation were visible

everywhere, all the long ranks of faces in the building were kindled.



"This thing decides it!" thought Mr. Buckstone; "but let the fight

proceed."



The voting began, and every sound ceased but the calling if the names

and the "Aye!"  "No!"  "No!"  "Aye!" of the responses.  There was not a

movement in the House; the people seemed to hold their breath.



The voting ceased, and then there was an interval of dead silence while

the clerk made up his count.  There was a two-thirds vote on the

University side--and two over.



The Speaker--"The rules are suspended, the motion is carried--first

reading of the bill!"



By one impulse the galleries broke forth into stormy applause, and even

some of the members of the House were not wholly able to restrain their

feelings.  The Speaker's gavel came to the rescue and his clear voice

followed:



"Order, gentlemen--!  The House will come to order!  If spectators offend

again, the Sergeant-at-arms will clear the galleries!"



Then he cast his eyes aloft and gazed at some object attentively for a

moment.  All eyes followed the direction of the Speaker's, and then there

was a general titter.  The Speaker said:



"Let the Sergeant-at Arms inform the gentleman that his conduct is an

infringement of the dignity of the House--and one which is not warranted

by the state of the weather."  Poor Sellers was the culprit.  He sat in

the front seat of the gallery, with his arms and his tired body

overflowing the balustrade--sound asleep, dead to all excitements, all

disturbances.  The fluctuations of the Washington weather had influenced

his dreams, perhaps, for during the recent tempest of applause he had

hoisted his gingham umbrella, and calmly gone on with his slumbers.

Washington Hawkins had seen the act, but was not near enough at hand to

save his friend, and no one who was near enough desired to spoil the

effect.  But a neighbor stirred up the Colonel, now that the House had

its eye upon him, and the great speculator furled his tent like the Arab.

He said:



"Bless my soul, I'm so absent-minded when I, get to thinking!  I never

wear an umbrella in the house--did anybody 'notice it'?  What-asleep?

Indeed?  And did you wake me sir?  Thank you--thank you very much indeed.

It might have fallen out of my hands and been injured.  Admirable

article, sir--present from a friend in Hong Kong; one doesn't come across

silk like that in this country--it's the real--Young Hyson, I'm told."



By this time the incident was forgotten, for the House was at war again.

Victory was almost in sight, now, and the friends of the bill threw

themselves into their work with enthusiasm.  They soon moved and carried

its second reading, and after a strong, sharp fight, carried a motion to

go into Committee of the whole.  The Speaker left his place, of course,

and a chairman was appointed.



Now the contest raged hotter than ever--for the authority that compels

order when the House sits as a House, is greatly diminished when it sits

as Committee.  The main fight came upon the filling of the blanks with

the sum to be appropriated for the purchase of the land, of course.



Buckstone--"Mr. Chairman, I move you, sir, that the words 'three millions

of' be inserted."



Mr. Hadley--"Mr. Chairman, I move that the words two and a half dollars

be inserted."



Mr. Clawson--"Mr. Chairman, I move the insertion of the words five and

twenty cents, as representing the true value of this barren and isolated

tract of desolation."



The question, according to rule, was taken upon the smallest sum first.

It was lost.



Then upon the nest smallest sum.  Lost, also.



And then upon the three millions.  After a vigorous battle that lasted a

considerable time, this motion was carried.



Then, clause by clause the bill was read, discussed, and amended in

trifling particulars, and now the Committee rose and reported.



The moment the House had resumed its functions and received the report,

Mr. Buckstone moved and carried the third reading of the bill.



The same bitter war over the sum to be paid was fought over again, and

now that the ayes and nays could be called and placed on record, every

man was compelled to vote by name on the three millions, and indeed on

every paragraph of the bill from the enacting clause straight through.

But as before, the friends of the measure stood firm and voted in a solid

body every time, and so did its enemies.



The supreme moment was come, now, but so sure was the result that not

even a voice was raised to interpose an adjournment.  The enemy were

totally demoralized.  The bill was put upon its final passage almost

without dissent, and the calling of the ayes and nays began.  When it was

ended the triumph was complete--the two-thirds vote held good, and a veto

was impossible, as far as the House was concerned!



Mr. Buckstone resolved that now that the nail was driven home, he would

clinch it on the other side and make it stay forever.  He moved a

reconsideration of the vote by which the bill had passed.  The motion was

lost, of course, and the great Industrial University act was an

accomplished fact as far as it was in the power of the House of

Representatives to make it so.



There was no need to move an adjournment.  The instant the last motion

was decided, the enemies of the University rose and flocked out of the

Hall, talking angrily, and its friends flocked after them jubilant and

congratulatory.  The galleries disgorged their burden, and presently the

house was silent and deserted.



When Col. Sellers and Washington stepped out of the building they were

surprised to find that the daylight was old and the sun well up.  Said

the Colonel:



"Give me your hand, my boy!  You're all right at last!  You're a

millionaire!  At least you're going to be.  The thing is dead sure.

Don't you bother about the Senate.  Leave me and Dilworthy to take care

of that.  Run along home, now, and tell Laura.  Lord, it's magnificent

news--perfectly magnificent!  Run, now.  I'll telegraph my wife.  She

must come here and help me build a house.  Everything's all right now!"



Washington was so dazed by his good fortune and so bewildered by the

gaudy pageant of dreams that was already trailing its long ranks through

his brain, that he wandered he knew not where, and so loitered by the way

that when at last he reached home he woke to a sudden annoyance in the

fact that his news must be old to Laura, now, for of course Senator

Dilworthy must have already been home and told her an hour before.  He

knocked at her door, but there was no answer.



"That is like the Duchess," said he.  "Always cool; a body can't excite

her-can't keep her excited, anyway.  Now she has gone off to sleep again,

as comfortably as if she were used to picking up a million dollars every

day or two"



Then he vent to bed.  But he could not sleep; so he got up and wrote a

long, rapturous letter to Louise, and another to his mother.  And he

closed both to much the same effect:



     "Laura will be queen of America, now, and she will be applauded, and

     honored and petted by the whole nation.  Her name will be in every

     one's mouth more than ever, and how they will court her and quote

     her bright speeches.  And mine, too, I suppose; though they do that

     more already, than they really seem to deserve.  Oh, the world is so

     bright, now, and so cheery; the clouds are all gone, our long

     struggle is ended, our, troubles are all over.  Nothing can ever

     make us unhappy any more.  You dear faithful ones will have the

     reward of your patient waiting now.  How father's Wisdom is proven

     at last!  And how I repent me, that there have been times when I

     lost faith and said, the blessing he stored up for us a tedious

     generation ago was but a long-drawn curse, a blight upon us all.

     But everything is well, now--we are done with poverty, sad toil,

     weariness and heart-break; all the world is filled with sunshine."









CHAPTER XLVI.



Philip left the capitol and walked up Pennsylvania Avenue in company with

Senator Dilworthy.  It was a bright spring morning, the air was soft and

inspiring; in the deepening wayside green, the pink flush of the

blossoming peach trees, the soft suffusion on the heights of Arlington,

and the breath of the warm south wind was apparent, the annual miracle of

the resurrection of the earth.



The Senator took off his hat and seemed to open his soul to the sweet

influences of the morning.  After the heat and noise of the chamber,

under its dull gas-illuminated glass canopy, and the all night struggle

of passion and feverish excitement there, the open, tranquil world seemed

like Heaven.  The Senator was not in an exultant mood, but rather in a

condition of holy joy, befitting a Christian statesman whose benevolent

plans Providence has made its own and stamped with approval.  The great

battle had been fought, but the measure had still to encounter the

scrutiny of the Senate, and Providence sometimes acts differently in the

two Houses.  Still the Senator was tranquil, for he knew that there is an

esprit de corps in the Senate which does not exist in the House, the

effect of which is to make the members complaisant towards the projects

of each other, and to extend a mutual aid which in a more vulgar body

would be called "log-rolling."



"It is, under Providence, a good night's work, Mr. Sterling.  The

government has founded an institution which will remove half the

difficulty from the southern problem.  And it is a good thing for the

Hawkins heirs, a very good thing.  Laura will be almost a millionaire."



"Do you think, Mr. Dilworthy, that the Hawkinses will get much of the

money?" asked Philip innocently, remembering the fate of the Columbus

River appropriation.



The Senator looked at his companion scrutinizingly for a moment to see if

he meant any thing personal, and then replied,



"Undoubtedly, undoubtedly.  I have had their interests greatly at heart.

There will of course be a few expenses, but the widow and orphans will

realize all that Mr. Hawkins, dreamed of for them."



The birds were singing as they crossed the Presidential Square, now

bright with its green turf and tender foliage.  After the two had gained

the steps of the Senator's house they stood a moment, looking upon the

lovely prospect:



"It is like the peace of God," said the Senator devoutly.



Entering the house, the Senator called a servant and said, "Tell Miss

Laura that we are waiting to see her.  I ought to have sent a messenger

on horseback half an hour ago," he added to Philip, "she will be

transported with our victory.  You must stop to breakfast, and see the

excitement."  The servant soon came back, with a wondering look and

reported,



"Miss Laura ain't dah, sah.  I reckon she hain't been dah all night!"



The Senator and Philip both started up.  In Laura's room there were the

marks of a confused and hasty departure, drawers half open, little

articles strewn on the floor.  The bed had not been disturbed.  Upon

inquiry it appeared that Laura had not been at dinner, excusing herself

to Mrs. Dilworthy on the plea of a violent headache; that she made a

request to the servants that she might not be disturbed.



The Senator was astounded.  Philip thought at once of Col. Selby.  Could

Laura have run away with him?  The Senator thought not.  In fact it could

not be.  Gen. Leffenwell, the member from New Orleans, had casually told

him at the house last night that Selby and his family went to New York

yesterday morning and were to sail for Europe to-day.



Philip had another idea which, he did not mention.  He seized his hat,

and saying that he would go and see what he could learn, ran to the

lodgings of Harry; whom he had not seen since yesterday afternoon, when

he left him to go to the House.



Harry was not in.  He had gone out with a hand-bag before six o'clock

yesterday, saying that he had to go to New York, but should return next

day.  In Harry's-room on the table Philip found this note:



          "Dear Mr. Brierly:--Can you meet me at the six o'clock train,

          and be my escort to New York?  I have to go about this

          University bill, the vote of an absent member we must have

          here, Senator Dilworthy cannot go.

                                             Yours,  L.  H."



"Confound it," said Phillip, "the noodle has fallen into her trap.  And

she promised she would let him alone."



He only stopped to send a note to Senator Dilworthy, telling him what he

had found, and that he should go at once to New York, and then hastened

to the railway station.  He had to wait an hour for a train, and when it

did start it seemed to go at a snail's pace.



Philip was devoured with anxiety.  Where could they, have gone?  What was

Laura's object in taking Harry?  Had the flight anything to do with

Selby?  Would Harry be such a fool as to be dragged into some public

scandal?



It seemed as if the train would never reach Baltimore.  Then there was a

long delay at Havre de Grace.  A hot box had to be cooled at Wilmington.

Would it never get on?  Only in passing around the city of Philadelphia

did the train not seem to go slow.  Philip stood upon the platform and

watched for the Boltons' house, fancied he could distinguish its roof

among the trees, and wondered how Ruth would feel if she knew he was so

near her.



Then came Jersey, everlasting Jersey, stupid irritating Jersey, where the

passengers are always asking which line they are on, and where they are

to come out, and whether they have yet reached Elizabeth.  Launched into

Jersey, one has a vague notion that he is on many lines and no one in

particular, and that he is liable at any moment to come to Elizabeth.

He has no notion what Elizabeth is, and always resolves that the next

time he goes that way, he will look out of the window and see what it is

like; but he never does.  Or if he does, he probably finds that it is

Princeton or something of that sort.  He gets annoyed, and never can see

the use of having different names for stations in Jersey.  By and by.

there is Newark, three or four Newarks apparently; then marshes; then

long rock cuttings devoted to the advertisements of 'patent medicines and

ready-made, clothing, and New York tonics for Jersey agues, and Jersey

City is reached.



On the ferry-boat Philip bought an evening paper from a boy crying

"'Ere's the Evening Gram, all about the murder," and with breathless

haste--ran his eyes over the following:



                            SHOCKING MURDER!!!



     TRAGEDY IN HIGH LIFE!!  A BEAUTIFUL WOMAN SHOOTS A DISTINGUISHED

     CONFEDERATE SOLDIER AT THE SOUTHERN HOTEL!!!  JEALOUSY THE CAUSE!!!



     This morning occurred another of those shocking murders which have

     become the almost daily food of the newspapers, the direct result of

     the socialistic doctrines and woman's rights agitations, which have

     made every woman the avenger of her own wrongs, and all society the

     hunting ground for her victims.



     About nine o'clock a lady deliberately shot a man dead in the public

     parlor of the Southern Hotel, coolly remarking, as she threw down

     her revolver and permitted herself to be taken into custody, "He

     brought it on himself."  Our reporters were immediately dispatched

     to the scene of the tragedy, and gathered the following particulars.



     Yesterday afternoon arrived at the hotel from Washington, Col.

     George Selby and family, who had taken passage and were to sail at

     noon to-day in the steamer Scotia for England.  The Colonel was a

     handsome man about forty, a gentleman Of wealth and high social

     position, a resident of New Orleans.  He served with distinction in

     the confederate army, and received a wound in the leg from which he

     has never entirely recovered, being obliged to use a cane in

     locomotion.



     This morning at about nine o'clock, a lady, accompanied by a

     gentleman, called at the office Of the hotel and asked for Col.

     Selby.  The Colonel was at breakfast.  Would the clerk tell him that

     a lady and gentleman wished to see him for a moment in the parlor?

     The clerk says that the gentleman asked her, "What do you want to

     see him for?" and that she replied, "He is going to Europe, and I

     ought to just say good by."



     Col. Selby was informed; and the lady and gentleman were shown to

     the parlor, in which were at the time three or four other persons.

     Five minutes after two shots were fired in quick succession, and

     there was a rush to the parlor from which the reports came.



     Col. Selby was found lying on the floor, bleeding, but not dead.

     Two gentlemen, who had just come in, had seized the lady, who made

     no resistance, and she was at once given in charge of a police

     officer who arrived.  The persons who were in the parlor agree

     substantially as to what occurred.  They had happened to be looking

     towards the door when the man--Col. Selby--entered with his cane,

     and they looked at him, because he stopped as if surprised and

     frightened, and made a backward movement. At the same moment the

     lady in the bonnet advanced towards him and said something like,

     "George, will you go with me?"  He replied, throwing up his hand and

     retreating, "My God I can't, don't fire," and the next instants two

     shots were heard and he fell.  The lady appeared to be beside

     herself with rage or excitement, and trembled very much when the

     gentlemen took hold of her; it was to them she said, "He brought it

     on himself."



     Col. Selby was carried at once to his room and Dr. Puffer, the

     eminent surgeon was sent for.  It was found that he was shot through

     the breast and through the abdomen.  Other aid was summoned, but the

     wounds were mortal, and Col Selby expired in an hour, in pain, but

     his mind was clear to the last and he made a full deposition.  The

     substance of it was that his murderess is a Miss Laura Hawkins, whom

     he had known at Washington as a lobbyist and had some business with

     her.  She had followed him with her attentions and solicitations,

     and had endeavored to make him desert his wife and go to Europe with

     her.  When he resisted and avoided her she had threatened him.  Only

     the day before he left Washington she had declared that he should

     never go out of the city alive without her.



     It seems to have been a deliberate and premeditated murder, the

     woman following him to Washington on purpose to commit it.



     We learn that the, murderess, who is a woman of dazzling and

     transcendent beauty and about twenty six or seven, is a niece of

     Senator Dilworthy at whose house she has been spending the winter.

     She belongs to a high Southern family, and has the reputation of

     being an heiress. Like some other great beauties and belles in

     Washington however there have been whispers that she had something

     to do with the lobby.  If we mistake not we have heard her name

     mentioned in connection with the sale of the Tennessee Lands to the

     Knobs University, the bill for which passed the House last night.



     Her companion is Mr. Harry Brierly, a New York dandy, who has been

     in Washington. His connection with her and with this tragedy is not

     known, but he was also taken into custody, and will be detained at

     least as a witness.



     P. S.  One of the persons present in the parlor says that after

     Laura Hawkins had fired twice, she turned the pistol towards

     herself, but that Brierly sprung and caught it from her hand, and

     that it was he who threw it on the floor.



     Further particulars with full biographies of all the parties in our

     next edition.



Philip hastened at once to the Southern Hotel, where he found still a

great state of excitement, and a thousand different and exaggerated

stories passing from mouth to mouth.  The witnesses of the event had told

it over so many time that they had worked it up into a most dramatic

scene, and embellished it with whatever could heighten its awfulness.

Outsiders had taken up invention also.  The Colonel's wife had gone

insane, they said.  The children had rushed into the parlor and rolled

themselves in their father's blood.  The hotel clerk said that he noticed

there was murder in the woman's eye when he saw her.  A person who had

met the woman on the stairs felt a creeping sensation.  Some thought

Brierly was an accomplice, and that he had set the woman on to kill his

rival.  Some said the woman showed the calmness and indifference of

insanity.



Philip learned that Harry and Laura had both been taken to the city

prison, and he went there; but he was not admitted.  Not being a

newspaper reporter, he could not see either of them that night; but the

officer questioned him suspiciously and asked him who he was.  He might

perhaps see Brierly in the morning.



The latest editions of the evening papers had the result of the inquest.

It was a plain enough case for the jury, but they sat over it a long

time, listening to the wrangling of the physicians.  Dr. Puffer insisted

that the man died from the effects of the wound in the chest.  Dr. Dobb

as strongly insisted that the wound in the abdomen caused death.  Dr.

Golightly suggested that in his opinion death ensued from a complication

of the two wounds and perhaps other causes.  He examined the table

waiter, as to whether Col. Selby ate any breakfast, and what he ate, and

if he had any appetite.



The jury finally threw themselves back upon the indisputable fact that

Selby was dead, that either wound would have killed him (admitted by the

doctors), and rendered a verdict that he died from pistol-shot wounds

inflicted by a pistol in the hands of Laura Hawkins.



The morning papers blazed with big type, and overflowed with details of

the murder.  The accounts in the evening papers were only the premonitory

drops to this mighty shower.  The scene was dramatically worked up in

column after column.  There were sketches, biographical and historical.

There were long "specials" from Washington, giving a full history of

Laura's career there, with the names of men with whom she was said to be

intimate, a description of Senator Dilworthy's residence and of his

family, and of Laura's room in his house, and a sketch of the Senator's

appearance and what he said.  There was a great deal about her beauty,

her accomplishments and her brilliant position in society, and her

doubtful position in society.  There was also an interview with Col.

Sellers and another with Washington Hawkins, the brother of the

murderess.  One journal had a long dispatch from Hawkeye, reporting the

excitement in that quiet village and the reception of the awful

intelligence.



All the parties had been "interviewed."  There were reports of

conversations with the clerk at the hotel; with the call-boy; with the

waiter at table with all the witnesses, with the policeman, with the

landlord (who wanted it understood that nothing of that sort had ever

happened in his house before, although it had always been frequented by

the best Southern society,) and with Mrs. Col. Selby.  There were

diagrams illustrating the scene of the shooting, and views of the hotel

and street, and portraits of the parties.  There were three minute and

different statements from the doctors about the wounds, so technically

worded that nobody could understand them.  Harry and Laura had also been

"interviewed" and there was a statement from Philip himself, which a

reporter had knocked him up out of bed at midnight to give, though how he

found him, Philip never could conjecture.



What some of the journals lacked in suitable length for the occasion,

they made up in encyclopaedic information about other similar murders and

shootings.



The statement from Laura was not full, in fact it was fragmentary, and

consisted of nine parts of, the reporter's valuable observations to one

of Laura's, and it was, as the reporter significantly remarked,

"incoherent", but it appeared that Laura claimed to be Selby's wife,

or to have been his wife, that he had deserted her and betrayed her, and

that she was going to follow him to Europe.  When the reporter asked:



"What made you shoot him Miss. Hawkins?"



Laura's only reply was, very simply,



"Did I shoot him?  Do they say I shot him?".  And she would say no more.



The news of the murder was made the excitement of the day. Talk of it

filled the town.  The facts reported were scrutinized, the standing of

the parties was discussed, the dozen different theories of the motive,

broached in the newspapers, were disputed over.



During the night subtle electricity had carried the tale over all the

wires of the continent and under the sea; and in all villages and towns

of the Union, from the.  Atlantic to the territories, and away up and

down the Pacific slope, and as far as London and Paris and Berlin, that

morning the name of Laura Hawkins was spoken by millions and millions of

people, while the owner of it--the sweet child of years ago, the

beautiful queen of Washington drawing rooms--sat shivering on her cot-bed

in the darkness of a damp cell in the Tombs.









CHAPTER XLVII.



Philip's first effort was to get Harry out of the Tombs.  He gained

permission to see him, in the presence of an officer, during the day,

and he found that hero very much cast down.



"I never intended to come to such a place as this, old fellow," he said

to Philip; "it's no place for a gentleman, they've no idea how to treat a

gentleman.  Look at that provender," pointing to his uneaten prison

ration.  "They tell me I am detained as a witness, and I passed the night

among a lot of cut-throats and dirty rascals--a pretty witness I'd be in

a month spent in such company."



"But what under heavens," asked Philip, "induced you to come to New York

with Laura!  What was it for?"



"What for?  Why, she wanted me to come.  I didn't know anything about

that cursed Selby.  She said it was lobby business for the University.

I'd no idea what she was dragging me into that confounded hotel for.

I suppose she knew that the Southerners all go there, and thought she'd

find her man.  Oh!  Lord, I wish I'd taken your advice.  You might as

well murder somebody and have the credit of it, as get into the

newspapers the way I have.  She's pure devil, that girl.  You ought to

have seen how sweet she was on me; what an ass I am."



"Well, I'm not going to dispute a poor, prisoner.  But the first thing is

to get you out of this.  I've brought the note Laura wrote you, for one

thing, and I've seen your uncle, and explained the truth of the case to

him.  He will be here soon."



Harry's uncle came, with; other friends, and in the course of the day

made such a showing to the authorities that Harry was released, on giving

bonds to appear as a witness when wanted.  His spirits rose with their

usual elasticity as soon as he was out of Centre Street, and he insisted

on giving Philip and his friends a royal supper at Delmonico's, an excess

which was perhaps excusable in the rebound of his feelings, and which was

committed with his usual reckless generosity.  Harry ordered, the supper,

and it is perhaps needless to say, that Philip paid the bill.



Neither of the young men felt like attempting to see Laura that day,

and she saw no company except the newspaper reporters, until the arrival

of  Col. Sellers and Washington Hawkins, who had hastened to New York

with all speed.



They found Laura in a cell in the upper tier of the women's department.

The cell was somewhat larger than those in the men's department, and

might be eight feet by ten square, perhaps a little longer.  It was of

stone, floor and all, and tile roof was oven shaped.  A narrow slit in

the roof admitted sufficient light, and was the only means of

ventilation; when the window was opened there was nothing to prevent the

rain coming in.  The only means of heating being from the corridor, when

the door was ajar, the cell was chilly and at this time damp.  It was

whitewashed and clean, but it had a slight jail odor; its only furniture

was a narrow iron bedstead, with a tick of straw and some blankets, not

too clean.



When Col. Sellers was conducted to this cell by the matron and looked

in, his emotions quite overcame him, the tears rolled down his cheeks and

his voice trembled so that he could hardly speak.  Washington was unable

to say anything; he looked from Laura to the miserable creatures who were

walking in the corridor with unutterable disgust.  Laura was alone calm

and self-contained, though she was not unmoved by the sight of the grief

of her friends.



"Are you comfortable, Laura?" was the first word the Colonel could get

out.



"You see," she replied.  "I can't say it's exactly comfortable."



"Are you cold?"



"It is pretty chilly.  The stone floor is like ice.  It chills me through

to step on it.  I have to sit on the bed."



"Poor thing, poor thing.  And can you eat any thing?"



"No, I am not hungry.  I don't know that I could eat any thing, I can't

eat that."



"Oh dear," continued the Colonel, "it's dreadful.  But cheer up, dear,

cheer up;" and the Colonel broke down entirely.



"But," he went on, "we'll stand by you.  We'll do everything for you.

I know you couldn't have meant to do it, it must have been insanity, you

know, or something of that sort.  You never did anything of the sort

before."



Laura smiled very faintly and said,



"Yes, it was something of that sort.  It's all a whirl.  He was a

villain; you don't know."



"I'd rather have killed him myself, in a duel you know, all fair.  I wish

I had.  But don't you be down.  We'll get you the best counsel, the

lawyers in New York can do anything; I've read of cases.  But you must be

comfortable now.  We've brought some of your clothes, at the hotel.  What

else, can we get for you?"



Laura suggested that she would like some sheets for her bed, a piece of

carpet to step on, and her meals sent in; and some books and writing

materials if it was allowed.  The Colonel and Washington promised to

procure all these things, and then took their sorrowful leave, a great

deal more affected than the criminal was, apparently, by her situation.



The colonel told the matron as he went away that if she would look to

Laura's comfort a little it shouldn't be the worse for her; and to the

turnkey who let them out he patronizingly said,



"You've got a big establishment here, a credit to the city.  I've got a

friend in there--I shall see you again, sir."



By the next day something more of Laura's own story began to appear in

the newspapers, colored and heightened by reporters' rhetoric.  Some of

them cast a lurid light upon the Colonel's career, and represented his

victim as a beautiful avenger of her murdered innocence; and others

pictured her as his willing paramour and pitiless slayer.  Her

communications to the reporters were stopped by her lawyers as soon as

they were retained and visited her, but this fact did not prevent--it may

have facilitated--the appearance of casual paragraphs here and there

which were likely to beget popular sympathy for the poor girl.



The occasion did not pass without "improvement" by the leading journals;

and Philip preserved the editorial comments of three or four of them

which pleased him most.  These he used to read aloud to his friends

afterwards and ask them to guess from which journal each of them had been

cut.  One began in this simple manner:--



     History never repeats itself, but the Kaleidoscopic combinations of

     the pictured present often seem to be constructed out of the broken

     fragments of antique legends.  Washington is not Corinth, and Lais,

     the beautiful daughter of Timandra, might not have been the

     prototype of the ravishing Laura, daughter of the plebeian house of

     Hawkins; but the orators add statesmen who were the purchasers of

     the favors of the one, may have been as incorruptible as the

     Republican statesmen who learned how to love and how to vote from

     the sweet lips of the Washington lobbyist; and perhaps the modern

     Lais would never have departed from the national Capital if there

     had been there even one republican Xenocrates who resisted her

     blandishments.  But here the parallel: fails.  Lais, wandering away

     with the youth Rippostratus, is slain by the women who are jealous

     of her charms. Laura, straying into her Thessaly with the youth

     Brierly, slays her other lover and becomes the champion of the

     wrongs of her sex.



Another journal began its editorial with less lyrical beauty, but with

equal force.  It closed as follows:--



     With Laura Hawkins, fair, fascinating and fatal, and with the

     dissolute Colonel of a lost cause, who has reaped the harvest he

     sowed, we have nothing to do.  But as the curtain rises on this

     awful tragedy, we catch a glimpse of the society at the capital

     under this Administration, which we cannot contemplate without alarm

     for the fate of the Republic.



A third newspaper took up the subject in a different tone.  It said:--



     Our repeated predictions are verified.  The pernicious doctrines

     which we have announced as prevailing in American society have been

     again illustrated.  The name of the city is becoming a reproach.

     We may have done something in averting its ruin in our resolute

     exposure of the Great Frauds; we shall not be deterred from

     insisting that the outraged laws for the protection of human life

     shall be vindicated now, so that a person can walk the streets or

     enter the public houses, at least in the day-time, without the risk

     of a bullet through his brain.



A fourth journal began its remarks as follows:--



     The fullness with which we present our readers this morning the

     details of the Selby-Hawkins homicide is a miracle of modern

     journalism.  Subsequent investigation can do little to fill out the

     picture.  It is the old story.  A beautiful woman shoots her

     absconding lover in cold-blood; and we shall doubtless learn in due

     time that if she was not as mad as a hare in this month of March,

     she was at least laboring under what is termed "momentary insanity."



It would not be too much to say that upon the first publication of the

facts of the tragedy, there was an almost universal feeling of rage

against the murderess in the Tombs, and that reports of her beauty only

heightened the indignation.  It was as if she presumed upon that and upon

her sex, to defy the law; and there was a fervent, hope that the law

would take its plain course.



Yet Laura was not without friends, and some of them very influential too.

She had in keeping a great many secrets and a great many reputations,

perhaps.  Who shall set himself up to judge human motives.  Why, indeed,

might we not feel pity for a woman whose brilliant career had been so

suddenly extinguished in misfortune and crime?  Those who had known her

so well in Washington might find it impossible to believe that the

fascinating woman could have had murder in her heart, and would readily

give ear to the current sentimentality about the temporary aberration of

mind under the stress of personal calamity.



Senator Dilworthy, was greatly shocked, of course, but he was full of

charity for the erring.



"We shall all need mercy," he said.  "Laura as an inmate of my family was

a most exemplary female, amiable, affectionate and truthful, perhaps too

fond of gaiety, and neglectful of the externals of religion, but a woman

of principle.  She may have had experiences of which I am ignorant, but

she could not have gone to this extremity if she had been in her own

right mind."



To the Senator's credit be it said, he was willing to help Laura and her

family in this dreadful trial.  She, herself, was not without money, for

the Washington lobbyist is not seldom more fortunate than the Washington

claimant, and she was able to procure a good many luxuries to mitigate

the severity of her prison life.  It enabled her also to have her own

family near her, and to see some of them daily.  The tender solicitude of

her mother, her childlike grief, and her firm belief in the real

guiltlessness of her daughter, touched even the custodians of the Tombs

who are enured to scenes of pathos.



Mrs. Hawkins had hastened to her daughter as soon as she received money

for the journey.  She had no reproaches, she had only tenderness and

pity.  She could not shut out the dreadful facts of the case, but it had

been enough for her that Laura had said, in their first interview,

"mother, I did not know what I was doing."  She obtained lodgings near,

the prison and devoted her life to her daughter, as if she had been

really her own child.  She would have remained in the prison day and

night if it had been permitted.  She was aged and feeble, but this great

necessity seemed to give her new life.



The pathetic story of the old lady's ministrations, and her simplicity

and faith, also got into the newspapers in time, and probably added to

the pathos of this wrecked woman's fate, which was beginning to be felt

by the public.  It was certain that she had champions who thought that

her wrongs ought to be placed against her crime, and expressions of this

feeling came to her in various ways.  Visitors came to see her, and gifts

of fruit and flowers were sent, which brought some cheer into her hard

and gloomy cell.



Laura had declined to see either Philip or Harry, somewhat to the

former's relief, who had a notion that she would necessarily feel

humiliated by seeing him after breaking faith with him, but to the

discomfiture of Harry, who still felt her fascination, and thought her

refusal heartless.  He told Philip that of course he had got through with

such a woman, but he wanted to see her.



Philip, to keep him from some new foolishness, persuaded him to go with

him to Philadelphia; and, give his valuable services in the mining

operations at Ilium.



The law took its course with Laura.  She was indicted for murder in the

first degree and held for trial at the summer term.  The two most

distinguished criminal lawyers in the city had been retained for her

defence, and to that the resolute woman devoted her days with a courage

that rose as she consulted with her counsel and understood the methods of

criminal procedure in New York.



She was greatly depressed, however, by the news from Washington.

Congress adjourned and her bill had failed to pass the Senate.  It must

wait for the next session.









CHAPTER XLVIII



It had been a bad winter, somehow, for the firm of Pennybacker, Bigler

and Small.  These celebrated contractors usually made more money during

the session of the legislature at Harrisburg than upon all their summer

work, and this winter had been unfruitful.  It was unaccountable to

Bigler.



"You see, Mr. Bolton," he said, and Philip was present at the

conversation, "it puts us all out.  It looks as if politics was played

out.  We'd counted on the year of Simon's re-election.  And, now, he's

reelected, and I've yet to see the first man who's the better for it."



"You don't mean to say," asked Philip, "that he went in without paying

anything?"



"Not a cent, not a dash cent, as I can hear," repeated Mr. Bigler,

indignantly.  "I call it a swindle on the state.  How it was done gets

me.  I never saw such a tight time for money in Harrisburg."



"Were there no combinations, no railroad jobs, no mining schemes put

through in connection with the election?



"Not that I knew," said Bigler, shaking his head in disgust.  "In fact it

was openly said, that there was no money in the election.  It's perfectly

unheard of."



"Perhaps," suggested Philip, "it was effected on what the insurance

companies call the 'endowment,' or the 'paid up' plan, by which a policy

is secured after a certain time without further payment."



"You think then," said Mr. Bolton smiling, "that a liberal and sagacious

politician might own a legislature after a time, and not be bothered with

keeping up his payments?"



"Whatever it is," interrupted Mr. Bigler, "it's devilish ingenious and

goes ahead of my calculations; it's cleaned me out, when I thought we had

a dead sure thing.  I tell you what it is, gentlemen, I shall go in for

reform.  Things have got pretty mixed when a legislature will give away a

United States senatorship."



It was melancholy, but Mr. Bigler was not a man to be crushed by one

misfortune, or to lose his confidence in human nature, on one exhibition

of apparent honesty.  He was already on his feet again, or would be if

Mr. Bolton could tide him over shoal water for ninety days.



"We've got something with money in it," he explained to Mr. Bolton,

"got hold of it by good luck.  We've got the entire contract for Dobson's

Patent Pavement for the city of Mobile.  See here."



Mr. Bigler made some figures; contract so; much, cost of work and

materials so much, profits so much.  At the end of three months the city

would owe the company three hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars-two

hundred thousand of that would be profits.  The whole job was worth at

least a million to the company--it might be more.  There could be no

mistake in these figures; here was the contract, Mr. Bolton knew what

materials were worth and what the labor would cost.



Mr. Bolton knew perfectly well from sore experience that there was always

a mistake in figures when Bigler or Small made them, and he knew that he

ought to send the fellow about his business.  Instead of that, he let him

talk.



They only wanted to raise fifty thousand dollars to carry on the

contract--that expended they would have city bonds.  Mr. Bolton said he

hadn't the money.  But Bigler could raise it on his name.  Mr. Bolton

said he had no right to put his family to that risk.  But the entire

contract could be assigned to him--the security was ample--it was a

fortune to him if it was forfeited.  Besides Mr. Bigler had been

unfortunate, he didn't know where to look for the necessaries of life for

his family.  If he could only have one more chance, he was sure he could

right himself.  He begged for it.



And Mr. Bolton yielded.  He could never refuse such appeals.  If he had

befriended a man once and been cheated by him, that man appeared to have

a claim upon him forever.  He shrank, however, from telling his wife what

he had done on this occasion, for he knew that if any person was more

odious than Small to his family it was Bigler.



"Philip tells me," Mrs. Bolton said that evening, "that the man Bigler

has been with thee again to-day.  I hope thee will have nothing more to

do with him."



"He has been very unfortunate," replied Mr. Bolton, uneasily.



"He is always unfortunate, and he is always getting thee into trouble.

But thee didn't listen to him again?"



"Well, mother, his family is in want, and I lent him my name--but I took

ample security.  The worst that can happen will be a little

inconvenience."



Mrs. Bolton looked grave and anxious, but she did not complain or

remonstrate; she knew what a "little inconvenience" meant, but she knew

there was no help for it.  If Mr. Bolton had been on his way to market to

buy a dinner for his family with the only dollar he had in the world in

his pocket, he would have given it to a chance beggar who asked him for

it.  Mrs. Bolton only asked (and the question showed that she was no mere

provident than her husband where her heart was interested),



"But has thee provided money for Philip to use in opening the coal mine?"



"Yes, I have set apart as much as it ought to cost to open the mine,

as much as we can afford to lose if no coal is found.  Philip has the

control of it, as equal partner in the venture, deducting the capital

invested.  He has great confidence in his success, and I hope for his

sake he won't be disappointed."



Philip could not but feel that he was treated very much like one of the

Bolton-family--by all except Ruth.  His mother, when he went home after

his recovery from his accident, had affected to be very jealous of Mrs.

Bolton, about whom and Ruth she asked a thousand questions

--an affectation of jealousy which no doubt concealed a real heartache,

which comes to every mother when her son goes out into the world and

forms new ties.  And to Mrs. Sterling; a widow, living on a small income

in a remote Massachusetts village, Philadelphia was a city of many

splendors.  All its inhabitants seemed highly favored, dwelling in ease

and surrounded by superior advantages.  Some of her neighbors had

relations living in Philadelphia, and it seemed to them somehow a

guarantee of respectability to have relations in Philadelphia.

Mrs. Sterling was not sorry to have Philip make his way among such

well-to-do people, and she was sure that no good fortune could be too

good for his deserts.



"So, sir," said Ruth, when Philip came from New York, "you have been

assisting in a pretty tragedy.  I saw your name in the papers.  Is this

woman a specimen of your western friends?"



"My only assistance," replied Philip, a little annoyed, was in trying to

keep Harry out of a bad scrape, and I failed after all.  He walked into

her trap, and he has been punished for it.  I'm going to take him up to

Ilium to see if he won't work steadily at one thing, and quit his

nonsense."



"Is she as beautiful as the newspapers say she is?"



"I don't know, she has a kind of beauty--she is not like--'



"Not like Alice?"



"Well, she is brilliant; she was called the handsomest woman in

Washington--dashing, you know, and sarcastic and witty.  Ruth, do you

believe a woman ever becomes a devil?"



"Men do, and I don't know why women shouldn't.  But I never saw one."



"Well, Laura Hawkins comes very near it.  But it is dreadful to think of

her fate."



"Why, do you suppose they will hang a woman?  Do you suppose they will be

so barbarous as that?"



"I wasn't thinking of that--it's doubtful if a New York jury would find a

woman guilty of any such crime.  But to think of her life if she is

acquitted."



"It is dreadful," said Ruth, thoughtfully, "but the worst of it is that

you men do not want women educated to do anything, to be able to earn an

honest living by their own exertions.  They are educated as if they were

always to be petted and supported, and there was never to be any such

thing as misfortune.  I suppose, now, that you would all choose to have

me stay idly at home, and give up my profession."



"Oh, no," said Philip, earnestly, "I  respect your resolution.  But,

Ruth, do you think you would be happier or do more good in following your

profession than in having a home of your own?"



"What is to hinder having a home of my, own?"



"Nothing, perhaps, only you never would be in it--you would be away day

and night, if you had any practice; and what sort of a home would that

make for your husband?"



"What sort of a home is it for the wife whose husband is always away

riding about in his doctor's gig?"



"Ah, you know that is not fair.  The woman makes the home."



Philip and Ruth often had this sort of discussion, to which Philip was

always trying to give a personal turn.  He was now about to go to Ilium

for the season, and he did not like to go without some assurance from

Ruth that she might perhaps love him some day; when he was worthy of it,

and when he could offer her something better than a partnership in his

poverty.



"I should work with a great deal better heart, Ruth," he said the morning

he was taking leave, "if I knew you cared for me a little."



Ruth was looking down; the color came faintly to her cheeks, and she

hesitated.  She needn't be looking down, he thought, for she was ever so

much shorter than tall Philip.



"It's not much of a place, Ilium," Philip went on, as if a little

geographical remark would fit in here as well as anything else, "and I

shall have plenty of time to think over the responsibility I have taken,

and--" his observation did not seem to be coming out any where.



But Ruth looked up, and there was a light in her eyes that quickened

Phil's pulse.  She took his hand, and said with serious sweetness:



"Thee mustn't lose heart, Philip."  And then she added, in another mood,

"Thee knows I graduate in the summer and shall have my diploma.  And if

any thing happens--mines explode sometimes--thee can send for me.

Farewell."



The opening of the Ilium coal mine was begun with energy, but without

many omens of success.  Philip was running a tunnel into the breast of

the mountain, in faith that the coal stratum ran there as it ought to.

How far he must go in he believed he knew, but no one could tell exactly.

Some of the miners said that they should probably go through the

mountain, and that the hole could be used for a railway tunnel.  The

mining camp was a busy place at any rate.  Quite a settlement of board

and log shanties had gone up, with a blacksmith shop, a small machine

shop, and a temporary store for supplying the wants of the workmen.

Philip and Harry pitched a commodious tent, and lived in the full

enjoyment of the free life.



There is no difficulty in digging a bole in the ground, if you have money

enough to pay for the digging, but those who try this sort of work are

always surprised at the large amount of money necessary to make a small

hole.  The earth is never willing to yield one product, hidden in her

bosom, without an equivalent for it.  And when a person asks of her coal,

she is quite apt to require gold in exchange.



It was exciting work for all concerned in it.  As the tunnel advanced

into the rock every day promised to be the golden day.  This very blast

might disclose the treasure.



The work went on week after week, and at length during the night as well

as the daytime.  Gangs relieved each other, and the tunnel was every

hour, inch by inch and foot by foot, crawling into the mountain.  Philip

was on the stretch of hope and excitement.  Every pay day he saw his

funds melting away, and still there was only the faintest show of what

the miners call "signs."



The life suited Harry, whose buoyant hopefulness was never disturbed.

He made endless calculations, which nobody could understand, of the

probable position of the vein.  He stood about among the workmen with the

busiest air.  When he was down at Ilium he called himself the engineer of

the works, and he used to spend hours smoking his pipe with the Dutch

landlord on the hotel porch, and astonishing the idlers there with the

stories of his railroad operations in Missouri.  He talked with the

landlord, too, about enlarging his hotel, and about buying some village

lots, in the prospect of a rise, when the mine was opened.  He taught the

Dutchman how to mix a great many cooling drinks for the summer time, and

had a bill at the hotel, the growing length of which Mr. Dusenheimer

contemplated with pleasant anticipations.  Mr. Brierly was a very useful

and cheering person wherever he went.



Midsummer arrived: Philip could report to Mr. Bolton only progress, and

this was not a cheerful message for him to send to Philadelphia in reply

to inquiries that he thought became more and more anxious.  Philip

himself was a prey to the constant fear that the money would give out

before the coal was struck.



At this time Harry was summoned to New York, to attend the trial of Laura

Hawkins.  It was possible that Philip would have to go also, her lawyer

wrote, but they hoped for a postponement.  There was important evidence

that they could not yet obtain, and he hoped the judge would not force

them to a trial unprepared.  There were many reasons for a delay, reasons

which of course are never mentioned, but which it would seem that a New

York judge sometimes must understand, when he grants a postponement upon

a motion that seems to the public altogether inadequate.



Harry went, but he soon came back.  The trial was put off.  Every week we

can gain, said the learned counsel, Braham, improves our chances.  The

popular rage never lasts long.









CHAPTER XLIX.



"We've struck it!"



This was the announcement at the tent door that woke Philip out of a

sound sleep at dead of night, and shook all the sleepiness out of him in

a trice.



"What!  Where is it?  When?  Coal?  Let me see it.  What quality is it?"

were some of the rapid questions that Philip poured out as he hurriedly

dressed.  "Harry, wake up, my boy, the coal train is coming.  Struck it,

eh?  Let's see?"



The foreman put down his lantern, and handed Philip a black lump.  There

was no mistake about it, it was the hard, shining anthracite, and its

freshly fractured surface, glistened in the light like polished steel.

Diamond never shone with such lustre in the eyes of Philip.



Harry was exuberant, but Philip's natural caution found expression in his

next remark.



"Now, Roberts, you are sure about this?"



"What--sure that it's coal?"



"O, no, sure that it's the main vein."



"Well, yes.  We took it to be that"



"Did you from the first?"



"I can't say we did at first.  No, we didn't.  Most of the indications

were there, but not all of them, not all of them.  So we thought we'd

prospect a bit."



"Well?"



"It was tolerable thick, and looked as if it might be the vein--looked as

if it ought to be the vein.  Then we went down on it a little.  Looked

better all the time."



"When did you strike it?"



"About ten o'clock."



"Then you've been prospecting about four hours."



"Yes, been sinking on it something over four hours."



"I'm afraid you couldn't go down very far in four hours--could you?"



"O yes--it's a good deal broke up, nothing but picking and gadding

stuff."



"Well, it does look encouraging, sure enough--but then the lacking

indications--"



"I'd rather we had them, Mr. Sterling, but I've seen more than one good

permanent mine struck without 'em in my time."



"Well, that is encouraging too."



"Yes, there was the Union, the Alabama and the Black Mohawk--all good,

sound mines, you know--all just exactly like this one when we first

struck them."



"Well, I begin to feel a good deal more easy.  I guess we've really got

it.  I remember hearing them tell about the Black Mohawk."



"I'm free to say that I believe it, and the men all think so too.  They

are all old hands at this business."



"Come Harry, let's go up and look at it, just for the comfort of it,"

said Philip.  They came back in the course of an hour, satisfied and

happy.



There was no more sleep for them that night.  They lit their pipes, put a

specimen of the coal on the table, and made it a kind of loadstone of

thought and conversation.



"Of course," said Harry, "there will have to be a branch track built, and

a 'switch-back' up the hill."



"Yes, there will be no trouble about getting the money for that now.  We

could sell-out tomorrow for a handsome sum.  That sort of coal doesn't go

begging within a mile of a rail-road.  I wonder if Mr. Bolton' would

rather sell out or work it?"



"Oh, work it," says Harry, "probably the whole mountain is coal now

you've got to it."



"Possibly it might not be much of a vein after all," suggested Philip.



"Possibly it is; I'll bet it's forty feet thick.  I told you.  I knew the

sort of thing as soon as I put my eyes on it."



Philip's next thought was to write to his friends and announce their good

fortune.  To Mr. Bolton he wrote a short, business letter, as calm as he

could make it.  They had found coal of excellent quality, but they could

not yet tell with absolute certainty what the vein was.  The prospecting

was still going on.  Philip also wrote to Ruth; but though this letter

may have glowed, it was not with the heat of burning anthracite.  He

needed no artificial heat to warm his pen and kindle his ardor when he

sat down to write to Ruth.  But it must be confessed that the words never

flowed so easily before, and he ran on for an hour disporting in all the

extravagance of his imagination.  When Ruth read it, she doubted if the

fellow had not gone out of his senses.  And it was not until she reached

the postscript that she discovered the cause of the exhilaration.

"P. S.--We have found coal."



The news couldn't have come to Mr. Bolton in better time.  He had never

been so sorely pressed.  A dozen schemes which he had in hand, any one

of which might turn up a fortune, all languished, and each needed just

a little more, money to save that which had been invested.  He hadn't

a piece of real estate that was not covered with mortgages, even to the

wild tract which Philip was experimenting on, and which had, no

marketable value above the incumbrance on it.



He had come home that day early, unusually dejected.



"I am afraid," he said to his wife, "that we shall have to give up our

house.  I don't care for myself, but for thee and the children."



"That will be the least of misfortunes," said Mrs. Bolton, cheerfully,

"if thee can clear thyself from debt and anxiety, which is wearing thee

out, we can live any where.  Thee knows we were never happier than when

we were in a much humbler home."



"The truth is, Margaret, that affair of Bigler and Small's has come on me

just when I couldn't stand another ounce.  They have made another failure

of it.  I might have known they would; and the sharpers, or fools, I

don't know which, have contrived to involve me for three times as much as

the first obligation.  The security is in my hands, but it is good for

nothing to me.  I have not the money to do anything with the contract."



Ruth heard this dismal news without great surprise.  She had long felt

that they were living on a volcano, that might go in to active operation

at any hour.  Inheriting from her father an active brain and the courage

to undertake new things, she had little of his sanguine temperament which

blinds one to difficulties and possible failures.  She had little

confidence in the many schemes which had been about to lift her father

out of all his embarrassments and into great wealth, ever since she was

a child; as she grew older, she rather wondered that they were as

prosperous as they seemed to be, and that they did not all go to smash

amid so many brilliant projects.  She was nothing but a woman, and did

not know how much of the business prosperity of the world is only a,

bubble of credit and speculation, one scheme helping to float another

which is no better than it, and the whole liable to come to naught and

confusion as soon as the busy brain that conceived them ceases its power

to devise, or when some accident produces a sudden panic.



"Perhaps, I shall be the stay of the family, yet," said Ruth, with an

approach to gaiety; "When we move into a little house in town, will thee

let me put a little sign on the door: DR. RUTH BOLTON?"



"Mrs. Dr. Longstreet, thee knows, has a great income."



"Who will pay for the sign, Ruth?" asked Mr. Bolton.



A servant entered with the afternoon mail from the office.  Mr. Bolton

took his letters listlessly, dreading to open them.  He knew well what

they contained, new difficulties, more urgent demands fox money.



"Oh, here is one from Philip.  Poor fellow.  I shall feel his

disappointment as much as my own bad luck.  It is hard to bear when one

is young."



He opened the letter and read.  As he read his face lightened, and he

fetched such a sigh of relief, that Mrs. Bolton and Ruth both exclaimed.



"Read that," he cried, "Philip has found coal!"



The world was changed in a moment.  One little sentence had done it.

There was no more trouble.  Philip had found coal.  That meant relief.

That meant fortune.  A great weight was taken off, and the spirits of the

whole household rose magically.  Good Money! beautiful demon of Money,

what an enchanter thou art!  Ruth felt that she was of less consequence

in the household, now that Philip had found Coal, and perhaps she was not

sorry to feel so.



Mr. Bolton was ten years younger the next morning.  He went into the

city, and showed his letter on change.  It was the sort of news his

friends were quite willing to listen to.  They took a new interest in

him.  If it was confirmed, Bolton would come right up again.  There would

be no difficulty about his getting all the money he wanted.  The money

market did not seem to be half so tight as it was the day before.

Mr. Bolton spent a very pleasant day in his office, and went home

revolving some new plans, and the execution of some projects he had long

been prevented from entering upon by the lack of money.



The day had been spent by Philip in no less excitement.  By daylight,

with Philip's letters to the mail, word had gone down to Ilium that coal

had been found, and very early a crowd of eager spectators had come up to

see for themselves.



The "prospecting" continued day and night for upwards of a week, and

during the first four or five days the indications grew more and more

promising, and the telegrams and letters kept Mr. Bolton duly posted.

But at last a change came, and the promises began to fail with alarming

rapidity.  In the end it was demonstrated without the possibility of a

doubt that the great "find" was nothing but a worthless seam.



Philip was cast down, all the more so because he had been so foolish as

to send the news to Philadelphia before he knew what he was writing

about.  And now he must contradict it.  "It turns out to be only a mere

seam," he wrote, "but we look upon it as an indication of better further

in."



Alas!  Mr. Bolton's affairs could not wait for "indications."  The future

might have a great deal in store, but the present was black and hopeless.

It was doubtful if any sacrifice could save him from ruin.  Yet sacrifice

he must make, and that instantly, in the hope of saving something from

the wreck of his fortune.



His lovely country home must go.  That would bring the most ready money.

The house that he had built with loving thought for each one of his

family, as he planned its luxurious apartments and adorned it; the

grounds that he had laid out, with so much delight in following the

tastes of his wife, with whom the country, the cultivation of rare trees

and flowers, the care of garden and lawn and conservatories were a

passion almost; this home, which he had hoped his children would enjoy

long after he had done with it, must go.



The family bore the sacrifice better than he did.  They declared in fact

--women are such hypocrites--that they quite enjoyed the city (it was in

August) after living so long in the country, that it was a thousand tunes

more convenient in every respect; Mrs. Bolton said it was a relief from

the worry of a large establishment, and Ruth reminded her father that she

should have had to come to town anyway before long.



Mr. Bolton was relieved, exactly as a water-logged ship is lightened by

throwing overboard the most valuable portion of the cargo--but the leak

was not stopped.  Indeed his credit was injured instead of helped by the

prudent step be had taken.  It was regarded as a sure evidence of his

embarrassment, and it was much more difficult for him to obtain help than

if he had, instead of retrenching, launched into some new speculation.



Philip was greatly troubled, and exaggerated his own share in the

bringing about of the calamity.



"You must not look at it so!" Mr. Bolton wrote him.  "You have neither

helped nor hindered--but you know you may help by and by.  It would have

all happened just so, if we had never begun to dig that hole.  That is

only a drop.  Work away.  I still have hope that something will occur to

relieve me.  At any rate we must not give up the mine, so long as we have

any show."



Alas!  the relief did not come.  New misfortunes came instead.  When the

extent of the Bigler swindle was disclosed there was no more hope that

Mr. Bolton could extricate himself, and he had, as an honest man, no

resource except to surrender all his property for the benefit of his

creditors.



The Autumn came and found Philip working with diminished force but still

with hope.  He had again and again been encouraged by good "indications,"

but he had again and again been disappointed.  He could not go on much

longer, and almost everybody except himself had thought it was useless to

go on as long as he had been doing.



When the news came of Mr. Bolton's failure, of course the work stopped.

The men were discharged, the tools were housed, the hopeful noise of

pickman and driver ceased, and the mining camp had that desolate and

mournful aspect which always hovers over a frustrated enterprise.



Philip sat down amid the ruins, and almost wished he were buried in them.

How distant Ruth was now from him, now, when she might need him most.

How changed was all the Philadelphia world, which had hitherto stood for

the exemplification of happiness and prosperity.



He still had faith that there was coal in that mountain.  He made

a picture of himself living there a hermit in a shanty by the tunnel,

digging away with solitary pick and wheelbarrow, day after day and year

after year, until he grew gray and aged, and was known in all that region

as the old man of the mountain.  Perhaps some day--he felt it must be so

some day--he should strike coal.  But what if he did?  Who would be alive

to care for it then?  What would he care for it then?  No, a man wants

riches in his youth, when the world is fresh to him.  He wondered why

Providence could not have reversed the usual process, and let the

majority of men begin with wealth and gradually spend it, and die poor

when they no longer needed it.



Harry went back to the city.  It was evident that his services were no

longer needed.  Indeed, he had letters from his uncle, which he did not

read to Philip, desiring him to go to San Francisco to look after some

government contracts in the harbor there.



Philip had to look about him for something to do; he was like Adam;

the world was all before him whereto choose.  He made, before he went

elsewhere, a somewhat painful visit to Philadelphia, painful but yet not

without its sweetnesses.  The family had never shown him so much

affection before; they all seemed to think his disappointment of more

importance than their own misfortune.  And there was that in Ruth's

manner--in what she gave him and what she withheld--that would have made

a hero of a very much less promising character than Philip Sterling.



Among the assets of the Bolton property, the Ilium tract was sold, and

Philip bought it in at the vendue, for a song, for no one cared to even

undertake the mortgage on it except himself.  He went away the owner of

it, and had ample time before he reached home in November, to calculate

how much poorer he was by possessing it.









CHAPTER L.



It is impossible for the historian, with even the best intentions,

to control events or compel the persons of his narrative to act wisely

or to be successful.  It is easy to see how things might have been better

managed; a very little change here and there would have made a very,

different history of this one now in hand.



If Philip had adopted some regular profession, even some trade, he might

now be a prosperous editor or a conscientious plumber, or an honest

lawyer, and have borrowed money at the saving's bank and built a cottage,

and be now furnishing it for the occupancy of Ruth and himself.  Instead

of this, with only a smattering of civil engineering, he is at his

mother's house, fretting and fuming over his ill-luck, and the hardness

and, dishonesty of men, and thinking of nothing but how to get the coal

out of the Ilium hills.



If Senator Dilworthy had not made that visit to Hawkeye, the Hawkins

family and Col. Sellers would not now be dancing attendance upon

Congress, and endeavoring to tempt that immaculate body into one of those

appropriations, for the benefit of its members, which the members find it

so difficult to explain to their constituents; and Laura would not be

lying in the Tombs, awaiting her trial for murder, and doing her best,

by the help of able counsel, to corrupt the pure fountain of criminal

procedure in New York.



If Henry Brierly had been blown up on the first Mississippi steamboat he

set foot on, as the chances were that he would be, he and Col. Sellers

never would have gone into the Columbus Navigation scheme, and probably

never into the East Tennessee Land scheme, and he would not now be

detained in New York from very important business operations on the

Pacific coast, for the sole purpose of giving evidence to convict of

murder the only woman he ever loved half as much as he loves himself.

If Mr. Bolton had said the little word "no" to Mr. Bigler, Alice Montague

might now be spending the winter in Philadelphia, and Philip also

(waiting to resume his mining operations in the spring); and Ruth would

not be an assistant in a Philadelphia hospital, taxing her strength with

arduous routine duties, day by day, in order to lighten a little the

burdens that weigh upon her unfortunate family.



It is altogether a bad business.  An honest historian, who had progressed

thus far, and traced everything to such a condition of disaster and

suspension, might well be justified in ending his narrative and writing

--"after this the deluge."  His only consolation would be in the reflection

that he was not responsible for either characters or events.



And the most annoying thought is that a little money, judiciously

applied, would relieve the burdens and anxieties of most of these people;

but affairs seem to be so arranged that money is most difficult to get

when people need it most.



A little of what Mr. Bolton has weakly given to unworthy people would now

establish his family in a sort of comfort, and relieve Ruth of the

excessive toil for which she inherited no adequate physical vigor.

A little money would make a prince of Col. Sellers; and a little more

would calm the anxiety of Washington Hawkins about Laura, for however the

trial ended, he could feel sure of extricating her in the end.  And if

Philip had a little money he could unlock the stone door in the mountain

whence would issue a stream of shining riches.  It needs a golden wand to

strike that rock.  If the Knobs University bill could only go through,

what a change would be wrought in the condition of most of the persons in

this history.  Even Philip himself would feel the good effects of it;

for Harry would have something and Col. Sellers would have something;

and have not both these cautious people expressed a determination to take

an interest in the Ilium mine when they catch their larks?



Philip could not resist the inclination to pay a visit to Fallkill.  He

had not been at the Montague's since the time he saw Ruth there, and he

wanted to consult the Squire about an occupation.  He was determined now

to waste no more time in waiting on Providence, but to go to work at

something, if it were nothing better, than teaching in the Fallkill

Seminary, or digging clams on Hingham beach.  Perhaps he could read law

in Squire Montague's office while earning his bread as a teacher in the

Seminary.



It was not altogether Philip's fault, let us own, that he was in this

position.  There are many young men like him in American society, of his

age, opportunities, education and abilities, who have really been

educated for nothing and have let themselves drift, in the hope that they

will find somehow, and by some sudden turn of good luck, the golden road

to fortune.  He was not idle or lazy, he had energy and a disposition to

carve his own way.  But he was born into a time when all young men of his

age caught the fever of speculation, and expected to get on in the world

by the omission of some of the regular processes which have been

appointed from of old.  And examples were not wanting to encourage him.

He saw people, all around him, poor yesterday, rich to-day, who had come

into sudden opulence by some means which they could not have classified

among any of the regular occupations of life.  A war would give such a

fellow a career and very likely fame.  He might have been a "railroad

man," or a politician, or a land speculator, or one of those mysterious

people who travel free on all rail-roads and steamboats, and are

continually crossing and recrossing the Atlantic, driven day and night

about nobody knows what, and make a great deal of money by so doing.

Probably, at last, he sometimes thought with a whimsical smile, he should

end by being an insurance agent, and asking people to insure their lives

for his benefit.



Possibly Philip did not think how much the attractions of Fallkill were

increased by the presence of Alice there.  He had known her so long, she

had somehow grown into his life by habit, that he would expect the

pleasure of her society without thinking mach about it.  Latterly he

never thought of her without thinking of Ruth, and if he gave the subject

any attention, it was probably in an undefined consciousness that, he had

her sympathy in his love, and that she was always willing to hear him

talk about it.  If he ever wondered that Alice herself was not in love

and never spoke of the possibility of her own marriage, it was a

transient thought for love did not seem necessary, exactly, to one so

calm and evenly balanced and with so many resources in her herself.



Whatever her thoughts may have been they were unknown to Philip, as they

are to these historians; if she was seeming to be what she was not, and

carrying a burden heavier than any one else carried, because she had to

bear it alone, she was only doing what thousands of women do, with a

self-renunciation and heroism, of which men, impatient and complaining,

have no conception.  Have not these big babies with beards filled all

literature with their outcries, their griefs and their lamentations?  It

is always the gentle sex which is hard and cruel and fickle and

implacable.



"Do you think you would be contented to live in Fallkill, and attend the

county Court?" asked Alice, when Philip had opened the budget of his new

programme.



"Perhaps not always," said Philip, "I might go and practice in Boston

maybe, or go to Chicago."



"Or you might get elected to Congress."



Philip looked at Alice to see if she was in earnest and not chaffing him.

Her face was quite sober.  Alice was one of those patriotic women in the

rural districts, who think men are still selected for Congress on account

of qualifications for the office.



"No," said Philip, "the chances are that a man cannot get into congress

now without resorting to arts and means that should render hint unfit to

go there; of course there are exceptions; but do you know that I could

not go into politics if I were a lawyer, without losing standing somewhat

in my profession, and without raising at least a suspicion of my

intentions and unselfishness?  Why, it is telegraphed all over the

country and commented on as something wonderful if a congressman votes

honestly and unselfishly and refuses to take advantage of his position to

steal from the government."



"But," insisted Alice, "I should think it a noble ambition to go to

congress, if it is so bad, and help reform it.  I don't believe it is as

corrupt as the English parliament used to be, if there is any truth in

the novels, and I suppose that is reformed."



"I'm sure I don't know where the reform is to begin.  I've seen a

perfectly capable, honest man, time and again, run against an illiterate

trickster, and get beaten.  I suppose if the people wanted decent members

of congress they would elect them.  Perhaps," continued Philip with a

smile, "the women will have to vote."



"Well, I should be willing to, if it were a necessity, just as I would go

to war and do what I could, if the country couldn't be saved otherwise,"

said Alice, with a spirit that surprised Philip, well as he thought he

knew her.  "If I were a young gentleman in these times--"



Philip laughed outright.  "It's just what Ruth used to say, 'if she were

a man.' I wonder if all the young ladies are contemplating a change of

sex."



"No, only a changed sex," retorted Alice; "we contemplate for the most

part young men who don't care for anything they ought to care for."



"Well," said Philip, looking humble, "I care for some things, you and

Ruth for instance; perhaps I ought not to.  Perhaps I ought to care for

Congress and that sort of thing."



"Don't be a goose, Philip.  I heard from Ruth yesterday."



"Can I see her letter?"



"No, indeed.  But I am afraid her hard work is telling on her, together

with her anxiety about her father."



"Do you think, Alice," asked Philip with one of those selfish thoughts

that are not seldom mixed with real love, "that Ruth prefers her

profession to--to marriage?"



"Philip," exclaimed Alice, rising to quit the room, and speaking

hurriedly as if the words were forced from her, "you are as blind as a

bat; Ruth would cut off her right hand for you this minute."



Philip never noticed that Alice's face was flushed and that her voice was

unsteady; he only thought of the delicious words he had heard.  And the

poor girl, loyal to Ruth, loyal to Philip, went straight to her room,

locked the door, threw herself on the bed and sobbed as if her heart

world break.  And then she prayed that her Father in Heaven would give

her strength.  And after a time she was calm again, and went to her

bureau drawer and took from a hiding place a little piece of paper,

yellow with age.  Upon it was pinned a four-leaved clover, dry and yellow

also.  She looked long at this foolish memento.  Under the clover leaf

was written in a school-girl's hand--"Philip, June, 186-."



Squire Montague thought very well of Philip's proposal.  It would have

been better if he had begun the study of the law as soon as he left

college, but it was not too late now, and besides he had gathered some

knowledge of the world.



"But," asked the Squire, "do you mean to abandon your land in

Pennsylvania?"  This track of land seemed an immense possible fortune to

this New England lawyer-farmer.  Hasn't it good timber, and doesn't the

railroad almost touch it?"



"I can't do anything with it now.  Perhaps I can sometime."



"What is your reason for supposing that there is coal there?"



"The opinion of the best geologist I could consult, my own observation

of the country, and the little veins of it we found.  I feel certain it

is there.  I shall find it some day.  I know it.  If I can only keep the

land till I make money enough to try again."



Philip took from his pocket a map of the anthracite coal region, and

pointed out the position of the Ilium mountain which he had begun to

tunnel.



"Doesn't it look like it?"



"It certainly does," said the Squire, very much interested.  It is not

unusual for a quiet country gentleman to be more taken with such a

venture than a speculator who, has had more experience in its

uncertainty.  It was astonishing how many New England clergymen, in the

time of the petroleum excitement, took chances in oil.  The Wall street

brokers are said to do a good deal of small business for country

clergymen, who are moved no doubt with the laudable desire of purifying

the New York stock board.



"I don't see that there is much risk," said the Squire, at length.

"The timber is worth more than the mortgage; and if that coal seam does

run there, it's a magnificent fortune.  Would you like to try it again in

the spring, Phil?"



Like to try it!  If he could have a little help, he would work himself,

with pick and barrow, and live on a crust.  Only give him one more

chance.



And this is how it came about that the cautious old Squire Montague was

drawn into this young fellow's speculation, and began to have his serene

old age disturbed by anxieties and by the hope of a great stroke of luck.



"To be sure, I only care about it for the boy," he said.  The Squire was

like everybody else; sooner or later he must "take a chance."



It is probably on account of the lack of enterprise in women that they

are not so fond of stock speculations and mine ventures as men.  It is

only when woman becomes demoralized that she takes to any sort of

gambling.  Neither Alice nor Ruth were much elated with the prospect of

Philip's renewal of his mining enterprise.



But Philip was exultant.  He wrote to Ruth as if his fortune were already

made, and as if the clouds that lowered over the house of Bolton were

already in the deep bosom of a coal mine buried.  Towards spring he went

to Philadelphia with his plans all matured for a new campaign.  His

enthusiasm was irresistible.



"Philip has come, Philip has come," cried the children, as if some great

good had again come into the household; and the refrain even sang itself

over in Ruth's heart as she went the weary hospital rounds.  Mr. Bolton

felt more courage than he had had in months, at the sight of his manly

face and the sound of his cheery voice.



Ruth's course was vindicated now, and it certainly did not become Philip,

who had nothing to offer but a future chance against the visible result

of her determination and industry, to open an argument with her.  Ruth

was never more certain that she was right and that she was sufficient

unto herself.  She, may be, did not much heed the still small voice that

sang in her maiden heart as she went about her work, and which lightened

it and made it easy, "Philip has come."



"I am glad for father's sake," she said to Philip, that thee has come.

"I can see that he depends greatly upon what thee can do.  He thinks women

won't hold out long," added Ruth with the smile that Philip never exactly

understood.



"And aren't you tired sometimes of the struggle?"



"Tired?  Yes, everybody is tired I suppose.  But it is a glorious

profession.  And would you want me to be dependent, Philip?"



"Well, yes, a little," said Philip, feeling his way towards what he

wanted to say.



"On what, for instance, just now?" asked Ruth, a little maliciously

Philip thought.



"Why, on----" he couldn't quite say it, for it occurred to him that he was

a poor stick for any body to lean on in the present state of his fortune,

and that the woman before him was at least as independent as he was.



"I don't mean depend," he began again.  "But I love you, that's all.  Am

I nothing--to you?" And Philip looked a little defiant, and as if he had

said something that ought to brush away all the sophistries of obligation

on either side, between man and woman.



Perhaps Ruth saw this.  Perhaps she saw that her own theories of a

certain equality of power, which ought to precede a union of two hearts,

might be pushed too far.  Perhaps she had felt sometimes her own weakness

and the need after all of so dear a sympathy and so tender an interest

confessed, as that which Philip could give.  Whatever moved her--the

riddle is as old as creation--she simply looked up to Philip and said in

a low voice, "Everything."



And Philip clasping both her hands in his, and looking down into her

eyes, which drank in all his tenderness with the thirst of a true woman's

nature--



"Oh! Philip, come out here," shouted young Eli, throwing the door wide

open.



And Ruth escaped away to her room, her heart singing again, and now as if

it would burst for joy, "Philip has come."



That night Philip received a dispatch from Harry--"The trial begins

tomorrow."









CHAPTER, LI



December 18--, found Washington Hawkins and Col. Sellers once more at the

capitol of the nation, standing guard over the University bill.  The

former gentleman was despondent, the latter hopeful.  Washington's

distress of mind was chiefly on Laura's account.  The court would soon

sit to try her, case, he said, and consequently a great deal of ready

money would be needed in the engineering of it.  The University bill was

