to fool us again.  We were only certain as to the altitudes

--we calculated to find out for ourselves how many hours

it is from the bottom to the top.  The summit is six

thousand feet above the sea, but only forty-five hundred

feet above the lake.  When we had walked half an hour,

we were fairly into the swing and humor of the undertaking,

so we cleared for action; that is to say, we got a boy whom

we met to carry our alpenstocks and satchels and overcoats

and things for us; that left us free for business.

I suppose we must have stopped oftener to stretch out

on the grass in the shade and take a bit of a smoke

than this boy was used to, for presently he asked if it

had been our idea to hire him by the job, or by the year?

We told him he could move along if he was in a hurry.

He said he wasn't in such a very particular hurry,

but he wanted to get to the top while he was young.

We told him to clear out, then, and leave the things at

the uppermost hotel and say we should be along presently.

He said he would secure us a hotel if he could, but if they

were all full he would ask them to build another one

and hurry up and get the paint and plaster dry against

we arrived.  Still gently chaffing us, he pushed ahead,

up the trail, and soon disappeared.  By six o'clock we

were pretty high up in the air, and the view of lake

and mountains had greatly grown in breadth and interest.

We halted awhile at a little public house, where we

had bread and cheese and a quart or two of fresh milk,

out on the porch, with the big panorama all before us--and

then moved on again.



Ten minutes afterward we met a hot, red-faced man plunging

down the mountain, making mighty strides, swinging his

alpenstock ahead of him, and taking a grip on the ground

with its iron point to support these big strides.

He stopped, fanned himself with his hat, swabbed the

perspiration from his face and neck with a red handkerchief,

panted a moment or two, and asked how far to Waeggis.

I said three hours.  He looked surprised, and said:



"Why, it seems as if I could toss a biscuit into the lake

from here, it's so close by.  Is that an inn, there?"



I said it was.



"Well," said he, "I can't stand another three hours,

I've had enough today; I'll take a bed there."



I asked:



"Are we nearly to the top?"



"Nearly to the TOP? Why, bless your soul, you haven't

really started, yet."



I said we would put up at the inn, too.  So we turned

back and ordered a hot supper, and had quite a jolly

evening of it with this Englishman.



The German landlady gave us neat rooms and nice beds,

and when I and my agent turned in, it was with the resolution

to be up early and make the utmost of our first Alpine sunrise.

But of course we were dead tired, and slept like policemen;

so when we awoke in the morning and ran to the window it

was already too late, because it was half past eleven.

It was a sharp disappointment.  However, we ordered

breakfast and told the landlady to call the Englishman,

but she said he was already up and off at daybreak--and

swearing like mad about something or other.  We could not

find out what the matter was.  He had asked the landlady

the altitude of her place above the level of the lake,

and she told him fourteen hundred and ninety-five feet.

That was all that was said; then he lost his temper.

He said that between ------fools and guide-books, a man

could acquire ignorance enough in twenty-four hours in a

country like this to last him a year.  Harris believed

our boy had been loading him up with misinformation;

and this was probably the case, for his epithet described

that boy to a dot.



We got under way about the turn of noon, and pulled out

for the summit again, with a fresh and vigorous step.

When we had gone about two hundred yards, and stopped

to rest, I glanced to the left while I was lighting my pipe,

and in the distance detected a long worm of black smoke

crawling lazily up the steep mountain.  Of course that was

the locomotive.  We propped ourselves on our elbows at once,

to gaze, for we had never seen a mountain railway yet.

Presently we could make out the train.  It seemed incredible

that that thing should creep straight up a sharp slant

like the roof of a house--but there it was, and it was doing

that very miracle.



In the course of a couple hours we reached a fine breezy

altitude where the little shepherd huts had big stones

all over their roofs to hold them down to the earth when

the great storms rage.  The country was wild and rocky

about here, but there were plenty of trees, plenty of moss,

and grass.



Away off on the opposite shore of the lake we could

see some villages, and now for the first time we could

observe the real difference between their proportions

and those of the giant mountains at whose feet they slept.

When one is in one of those villages it seems spacious,

and its houses seem high and not out of proportion to the

mountain that overhands them--but from our altitude,

what a change! The mountains were bigger and grander

than ever, as they stood there thinking their solemn

thoughts with their heads in the drifting clouds,

but the villages at their feet--when the painstaking

eye could trace them up and find them--were so reduced,

almost invisible, and lay so flat against the ground,

that the exactest simile I can devise is to compare

them to ant-deposits of granulated dirt overshadowed

by the huge bulk of a cathedral.  The steamboats skimming

along under the stupendous precipices were diminished

by distance to the daintiest little toys, the sailboats

and rowboats to shallops proper for fairies that keep

house in the cups of lilies and ride to court on the backs

of bumblebees.



Presently we came upon half a dozen sheep nibbling grass

in the spray of a stream of clear water that sprang

from a rock wall a hundred feet high, and all at once

our ears were startled with a melodious "Lul ...

l ... l l l llul-lul-LAhee-o-o-o!" pealing joyously

from a near but invisible source, and recognized that we

were hearing for the first time the famous Alpine JODEL

in its own native wilds.  And we recognized, also,

that it was that sort of quaint commingling of baritone

and falsetto which at home we call "Tyrolese warbling."



The jodeling (pronounced yOdling--emphasis on the O)

continued, and was very pleasant and inspiriting to hear.

Now the jodeler appeared--a shepherd boy of sixteen

--and in our gladness and gratitude we gave him a franc

to jodel some more.  So he jodeled and we listened.

We moved on, presently, and he generously jodeled us

out of sight.  After about fifteen minutes we came across

another shepherd boy who was jodeling, and gave him half

a franc to keep it up.  He also jodeled us out of sight.

After that, we found a jodeler every ten minutes;

we gave the first one eight cents, the second one

six cents, the third one four, the fourth one a penny,

contributed nothing to Nos.  5, 6, and 7, and during

the remainder of the day hired the rest of the jodelers,

at a franc apiece, not to jodel any more.  There is somewhat

too much of the jodeling in the Alps.



About the middle of the afternoon we passed through

a prodigious natural gateway called the Felsenthor,

formed by two enormous upright rocks, with a third lying

across the top.  There was a very attractive little

hotel close by, but our energies were not conquered yet,

so we went on.



Three hours afterward we came to the railway-track. It

was planted straight up the mountain with the slant

of a ladder that leans against a house, and it seemed

to us that man would need good nerves who proposed

to travel up it or down it either.



During the latter part of the afternoon we cooled our

roasting interiors with ice-cold water from clear streams,

the only really satisfying water we had tasted since we

left home, for at the hotels on the continent they

merely give you a tumbler of ice to soak your water in,

and that only modifies its hotness, doesn't make it cold.

Water can only be made cold enough for summer comfort by

being prepared in a refrigerator or a closed ice-pitcher.

Europeans say ice-water impairs digestion.  How do they

know?--they never drink any.



At ten minutes past six we reached the Kaltbad station,

where there is a spacious hotel with great verandas which

command a majestic expanse of lake and mountain scenery.

We were pretty well fagged out, now, but as we did

not wish to miss the Alpine sunrise, we got through our

dinner as quickly as possible and hurried off to bed.

It was unspeakably comfortable to stretch our weary limbs

between the cool, damp sheets.  And how we did sleep!--for

there is no opiate like Alpine pedestrianism.



In the morning we both awoke and leaped out of bed at the

same instant and ran and stripped aside the window-curtains;

but we suffered a bitter disappointment again: it

was already half past three in the afternoon.



We dressed sullenly and in ill spirits, each accusing

the other of oversleeping.  Harris said if we had brought

the courier along, as we ought to have done, we should

not have missed these sunrises.  I said he knew very well

that one of us would have to sit up and wake the courier;

and I added that we were having trouble enough to take

care of ourselves, on this climb, without having to take

care of a courier besides.



During breakfast our spirits came up a little, since we

found by this guide-book that in the hotels on the summit

the tourist is not left to trust to luck for his sunrise,

but is roused betimes by a man who goes through the halls

with a great Alpine horn, blowing blasts that would

raise the dead.  And there was another consoling thing:

the guide-book said that up there on the summit the guests

did not wait to dress much, but seized a red bed blanket

and sailed out arrayed like an Indian.  This was good;

this would be romantic; two hundred and fifty people

grouped on the windy summit, with their hair flying and

their red blankets flapping, in the solemn presence of the

coming sun, would be a striking and memorable spectacle.

So it was good luck, not ill luck, that we had missed

those other sunrises.



We were informed by the guide-book that we were now

3,228 feet above the level of the lake--therefore

full two-thirds of our journey had been accomplished.

We got away at a quarter past four, P.M.; a hundred yards

above the hotel the railway divided; one track went

straight up the steep hill, the other one turned square

off to the right, with a very slight grade.  We took

the latter, and followed it more than a mile, turned a

rocky corner, and came in sight of a handsome new hotel.

If we had gone on, we should have arrived at the summit,

but Harris preferred to ask a lot of questions--as usual,

of a man who didn't know anything--and he told us to go

back and follow the other route.  We did so.  We could ill

afford this loss of time.



We climbed and climbed; and we kept on climbing; we reached about

forty summits, but there was always another one just ahead.

It came on to rain, and it rained in dead earnest.

We were soaked through and it was bitter cold.  Next a

smoky fog of clouds covered the whole region densely,

and we took to the railway-ties to keep from getting lost.

Sometimes we slopped along in a narrow path on the left-hand

side of the track, but by and by when the fog blew as aside

a little and we saw that we were treading the rampart

of a precipice and that our left elbows were projecting

over a perfectly boundless and bottomless vacancy,

we gasped, and jumped for the ties again.



The night shut down, dark and drizzly and cold.

About eight in the evening the fog lifted and showed us

a well-worn path which led up a very steep rise to the left.

We took it, and as soon as we had got far enough from the

railway to render the finding it again an impossibility,

the fog shut down on us once more.



We were in a bleak, unsheltered place, now, and had

to trudge right along, in order to keep warm, though we

rather expected to go over a precipice, sooner or later.

About nine o'clock we made an important discovery

--that we were not in any path.  We groped around a while

on our hands and knees, but we could not find it;

so we sat down in the mud and the wet scant grass to wait.



We were terrified into this by being suddenly confronted

with a vast body which showed itself vaguely for an instant

and in the next instant was smothered in the fog again.

It was really the hotel we were after, monstrously magnified

by the fog, but we took it for the face of a precipice,

and decided not to try to claw up it.



We sat there an hour, with chattering teeth and quivering bodies,

and quarreled over all sorts of trifles, but gave most

of our attention to abusing each other for the stupidity

of deserting the railway-track. We sat with our backs

to the precipice, because what little wind there was

came from that quarter.  At some time or other the fog

thinned a little; we did not know when, for we were facing

the empty universe and the thinness could not show;

but at last Harris happened to look around, and there stood

a huge, dim, spectral hotel where the precipice had been.

One could faintly discern the windows and chimneys,

and a dull blur of lights.  Our first emotion was deep,

unutterable gratitude, our next was a foolish rage,

born of the suspicion that possibly the hotel had been

visible three-quarters of an hour while we sat there

in those cold puddles quarreling.



Yes, it was the Rigi-Kulm hotel--the one that occupies

the extreme summit, and whose remote little sparkle

of lights we had often seen glinting high aloft among

the stars from our balcony away down yonder in Lucerne.

The crusty portier and the crusty clerks gave us the surly

reception which their kind deal out in prosperous times,

but by mollifying them with an extra display of obsequiousness

and servility we finally got them to show us to the room

which our boy had engaged for us.



We got into some dry clothing, and while our supper was

preparing we loafed forsakenly through a couple of vast

cavernous drawing-rooms, one of which had a stove in it.

This stove was in a corner, and densely walled around

with people.  We could not get near the fire, so we moved

at large in the artic spaces, among a multitude of people

who sat silent, smileless, forlorn, and shivering--thinking

what fools they were to come, perhaps.  There were some

Americans and some Germans, but one could see that the

great majority were English.



We lounged into an apartment where there was a great crowd,

to see what was going on.  It was a memento-magazine.

The tourists were eagerly buying all sorts and styles of

paper-cutters, marked "Souvenir of the Rigi," with handles

made of the little curved horn of the ostensible chamois;

there were all manner of wooden goblets and such things,

similarly marked.  I was going to buy a paper-cutter, but I

believed I could remember the cold comfort of the Rigi-Kulm

without it, so I smothered the impulse.



Supper warmed us, and we went immediately to bed--but first,

as Mr. Baedeker requests all tourists to call his attention

to any errors which they may find in his guide-books, I

dropped him a line to inform him he missed it by just

about three days.  I had previously informed him of his

mistake about the distance from Allerheiligen to Oppenau,

and had also informed the Ordnance Depart of the German

government of the same error in the imperial maps.

I will add, here, that I never got any answer to those letters,

or any thanks from either of those sources; and, what is still

more discourteous, these corrections have not been made,

either in the maps or the guide-books. But I will write

again when I get time, for my letters may have miscarried.



We curled up in the clammy beds, and went to sleep without

rocking.

We were so sodden with fatigue that we never stirred nor

turned over till the blooming blasts of the Alpine horn

aroused us.  It may well be imagined that we did not lose

any time.  We snatched on a few odds and ends of clothing,

cocooned ourselves in the proper red blankets, and plunged

along the halls and out into the whistling wind bareheaded.

We saw a tall wooden scaffolding on the very peak

of the summit, a hundred yards away, and made for it.

We rushed up the stairs to the top of this scaffolding,

and stood there, above the vast outlying world, with hair

flying and ruddy blankets waving and cracking in the fierce

breeze.



"Fifteen minutes too late, at last!" said Harris,

in a vexed voice.  "The sun is clear above the horizon."



"No matter," I said, "it is a most magnificent spectacle,

and we will see it do the rest of its rising anyway."



In a moment we were deeply absorbed in the marvel before us,

and dead to everything else.  The great cloud-barred disk

of the sun stood just above a limitless expanse of tossing

white-caps--so to speak--a billowy chaos of massy mountain

domes and peaks draped in imperishable snow, and flooded

with an opaline glory of changing and dissolving splendors,

while through rifts in a black cloud-bank above the sun,

radiating lances of diamond dust shot to the zenith.

The cloven valleys of the lower world swam in a tinted

mist which veiled the ruggedness of their crags and ribs

and ragged forests, and turned all the forbidding region

into a soft and rich and sensuous paradise.



We could not speak.  We could hardly breathe.

We could only gaze in drunken ecstasy and drink in it.

Presently Harris exclaimed:



"Why--nation, it's going DOWN!"



Perfectly true.  We had missed the MORNING hornblow,

and slept all day.  This was stupefying.



Harris said:



"Look here, the sun isn't the spectacle--it's US--stacked

up here on top of this gallows, in these idiotic blankets,

and two hundred and fifty well-dressed men and women down

here gawking up at us and not caring a straw whether the sun

rises or sets, as long as they've got such a ridiculous

spectacle as this to set down in their memorandum-books.

They seem to be laughing their ribs loose, and there's

one girl there at appears to be going all to pieces.

I never saw such a man as you before.  I think you are

the very last possibility in the way of an ass."



"What have _I_ done?" I answered, with heat.



"What have you done? You've got up at half past seven

o'clock in the evening to see the sun rise, that's what

you've done."



"And have you done any better, I'd like to know? I've

always used to get up with the lark, till I came under

the petrifying influence of your turgid intellect."



"YOU used to get up with the lark--Oh, no doubt

--you'll get up with the hangman one of these days.

But you ought to be ashamed to be jawing here like this,

in a red blanket, on a forty-foot scaffold on top

of the Alps.  And no end of people down here to boot;

this isn't any place for an exhibition of temper."



And so the customary quarrel went on.  When the sun

was fairly down, we slipped back to the hotel in the

charitable gloaming, and went to bed again.  We had

encountered the horn-blower on the way, and he had tried

to collect compensation, not only for announcing the sunset,

which we did see, but for the sunrise, which we had

totally missed; but we said no, we only took our solar

rations on the "European plan"--pay for what you get.

He promised to make us hear his horn in the morning,

if we were alive.







CHAPTER XXIX

[Looking West for Sunrise]



He kept his word.  We heard his horn and instantly got up.

It was dark and cold and wretched.  As I fumbled around

for the matches, knocking things down with my quaking hands,

I wished the sun would rise in the middle of the day,

when it was warm and bright and cheerful, and one

wasn't sleepy.  We proceeded to dress by the gloom of a

couple sickly candles, but we could hardly button anything,

our hands shook so.  I thought of how many happy people

there were in Europe, Asia, and America, and everywhere,

who were sleeping peacefully in their beds, and did not

have to get up and see the Rigi sunrise--people who did

not appreciate their advantage, as like as not, but would

get up in the morning wanting more boons of Providence.

While thinking these thoughts I yawned, in a rather ample way,

and my upper teeth got hitched on a nail over the door,

and while I was mounting a chair to free myself, Harris drew

the window-curtain, and said:



"Oh, this is luck! We shan't have to go out at all

--yonder are the mountains, in full view."



That was glad news, indeed.  It made us cheerful right away.

One could see the grand Alpine masses dimly outlined

against the black firmament, and one or two faint stars

blinking through rifts in the night.  Fully clothed,

and wrapped in blankets, and huddled ourselves up,

by the window, with lighted pipes, and fell into chat,

while we waited in exceeding comfort to see how an Alpine

sunrise was going to look by candlelight.  By and by

a delicate, spiritual sort of effulgence spread itself

by imperceptible degrees over the loftiest altitudes of

the snowy wastes--but there the effort seemed to stop.

I said, presently:



"There is a hitch about this sunrise somewhere.

It doesn't seem to go.  What do you reckon is the matter

with it?"



"I don't know.  It appears to hang fire somewhere.

I never saw a sunrise act like that before.  Can it be

that the hotel is playing anything on us?"



"Of course not.  The hotel merely has a property interest

in the sun, it has nothing to do with the management of it.

It is a precarious kind of property, too; a succession

of total eclipses would probably ruin this tavern.

Now what can be the matter with this sunrise?"



Harris jumped up and said:



"I've got it! I know what's the matter with it! We've

been looking at the place where the sun SET last night!"



"It is perfectly true! Why couldn't you have thought of

that sooner? Now we've lost another one! And all through

your blundering.  It was exactly like you to light a pipe

and sit down to wait for the sun to rise in the west."



"It was exactly like me to find out the mistake, too.

You never would have found it out.  I find out all the mistakes."



"You make them all, too, else your most valuable faculty

would be wasted on you.  But don't stop to quarrel,

now--maybe we are not too late yet."



But we were.  The sun was well up when we got to the

exhibition-ground.



On our way up we met the crowd returning--men and women

dressed in all sorts of queer costumes, and exhibiting

all degrees of cold and wretchedness in their gaits

and countenances.  A dozen still remained on the ground

when we reached there, huddled together about the scaffold

with their backs to the bitter wind.  They had their red

guide-books open at the diagram of the view, and were

painfully picking out the several mountains and trying

to impress their names and positions on their memories.

It was one of the saddest sights I ever saw.



Two sides of this place were guarded by railings,

to keep people from being blown over the precipices.

The view, looking sheer down into the broad valley,

eastward, from this great elevation--almost a perpendicular

mile--was very quaint and curious.  Counties, towns,

hilly ribs and ridges, wide stretches of green meadow,

great forest tracts, winding streams, a dozen blue lakes,

a block of busy steamboats--we saw all this little

world in unique circumstantiality of detail--saw it

just as the birds see it--and all reduced to the smallest

of scales and as sharply worked out and finished as a

steel engraving.  The numerous toy villages, with tiny

spires projecting out of them, were just as the children

might have left them when done with play the day before;

the forest tracts were diminished to cushions of moss;

one or two big lakes were dwarfed to ponds, the smaller

ones to puddles--though they did not look like puddles,

but like blue teardrops which had fallen and lodged

in slight depressions, conformable to their shapes,

among the moss-beds and the smooth levels of dainty

green farm-land; the microscopic steamboats glided along,

as in a city reservoir, taking a mighty time to cover

the distance between ports which seemed only a yard apart;

and the isthmus which separated two lakes looked as if

one might stretch out on it and lie with both elbows

in the water, yet we knew invisible wagons were toiling

across it and finding the distance a tedious one.

This beautiful miniature world had exactly the appearance

of those "relief maps" which reproduce nature precisely,

with the heights and depressions and other details graduated

to a reduced scale, and with the rocks, trees, lakes,

etc., colored after nature.



I believed we could walk down to Waeggis or Vitznau

in a day, but I knew we could go down by rail in about

an hour, so I chose the latter method.  I wanted to see

what it was like, anyway.  The train came along about

the middle of the afternoon, and an odd thing it was.

The locomotive-boiler stood on end, and it and the whole

locomotive were tilted sharply backward.  There were

two passenger-cars, roofed, but wide open all around.

These cars were not tilted back, but the seats were;

this enables the passenger to sit level while going down a

steep incline.



There are three railway-tracks; the central one is cogged;

the "lantern wheel" of the engine grips its way along

these cogs, and pulls the train up the hill or retards its

motion on the down trip.  About the same speed--three miles

an hour--is maintained both ways.  Whether going up or down,

the locomotive is always at the lower end of the train.

It pushes in the one case, braces back in the other.

The passenger rides backward going up, and faces forward

going down.



We got front seats, and while the train moved along

about fifty yards on level ground, I was not the

least frightened; but now it started abruptly downstairs,

and I caught my breath.  And I, like my neighbors,

unconsciously held back all I could, and threw my weight

to the rear, but, of course, that did no particular good.

I had slidden down the balusters when I was a boy,

and thought nothing of it, but to slide down the balusters

in a railway-train is a thing to make one's flesh creep.

Sometimes we had as much as ten yards of almost level

ground, and this gave us a few full breaths in comfort;

but straightway we would turn a corner and see a long steep

line of rails stretching down below us, and the comfort

was at an end.  One expected to see the locomotive pause,

or slack up a little, and approach this plunge cautiously,

but it did nothing of the kind; it went calmly on, and went

it reached the jumping-off place it made a sudden bow,

and went gliding smoothly downstairs, untroubled by

the circumstances.



It was wildly exhilarating to slide along the edge of

the precipices, after this grisly fashion, and look straight

down upon that far-off valley which I was describing a while ago.





There was no level ground at the Kaltbad station;

the railbed was as steep as a roof; I was curious

to see how the stop was going to be managed.

But it was very simple; the train came sliding down,

and when it reached the right spot it just stopped--that

was all there was "to it"--stopped on the steep incline,

and when the exchange of passengers and baggage had

been made, it moved off and went sliding down again.

The train can be stopped anywhere, at a moment's notice.



There was one curious effect, which I need not take the

trouble to describe--because I can scissor a description

of it out of the railway company's advertising pamphlet,

and save my ink:



"On the whole tour, particularly at the Descent, we undergo

an optical illusion which often seems to be incredible.

All the shrubs, fir trees, stables, houses, etc., seem to be bent

in a slanting direction, as by an immense pressure of air.

They are all standing awry, so much awry that the chalets

and cottages of the peasants seem to be tumbling down.

It is the consequence of the steep inclination of the line.

Those who are seated in the carriage do not observe that they

are doing down a declivity of twenty to twenty-five degrees

(their seats being adapted to this course of proceeding

and being bent down at their backs). They mistake their

carriage and its horizontal lines for a proper measure

of the normal plain, and therefore all the objects outside

which really are in a horizontal position must show a

disproportion of twenty to twenty-five degrees declivity,

in regard to the mountain."



By the time one reaches Kaltbad, he has acquired confidence

in the railway, and he now ceases to try to ease the

locomotive by holding back.  Thenceforth he smokes his

pipe in serenity, and gazes out upon the magnificent

picture below and about him with unfettered enjoyment.

There is nothing to interrupt the view or the breeze;

it is like inspecting the world on the wing.  However--to be

exact--there is one place where the serenity lapses for a while;

this is while one is crossing the Schnurrtobel Bridge,

a frail structure which swings its gossamer frame down

through the dizzy air, over a gorge, like a vagrant

spider-strand.



One has no difficulty in remembering his sins while

the train is creeping down this bridge; and he repents

of them, too; though he sees, when he gets to Vitznau,

that he need not have done it, the bridge was perfectly safe.



So ends the eventual trip which we made to the Rigi-Kulm

to see an Alpine sunrise.







CHAPTER XXX

[Harris Climbs Mountains for Me]



An hour's sail brought us to Lucerne again.  I judged

it best to go to bed and rest several days, for I knew

that the man who undertakes to make the tour of Europe

on foot must take care of himself.



Thinking over my plans, as mapped out, I perceived that

they did not take in the Furka Pass, the Rhone Glacier,

the Finsteraarhorn, the Wetterhorn, etc.  I immediately

examined the guide-book to see if these were important,

and found they were; in fact, a pedestrian tour of Europe

could not be complete without them.  Of course that decided

me at once to see them, for I never allow myself to do

things by halves, or in a slurring, slipshod way.



I called in my agent and instructed him to go without delay

and make a careful examination of these noted places,

on foot, and bring me back a written report of the result,

for insertion in my book.  I instructed him to go to Hospenthal

as quickly as possible, and make his grand start from there;

to extend his foot expedition as far as the Giesbach fall,

and return to me from thence by diligence or mule.

I told him to take the courier with him.



He objected to the courier, and with some show of reason,

since he was about to venture upon new and untried ground;

but I thought he might as well learn how to take care of

the courier now as later, therefore I enforced my point.

I said that the trouble, delay, and inconvenience

of traveling with a courier were balanced by the deep

respect which a courier's presence commands, and I must

insist that as much style be thrown into my journeys

as possible.



So the two assumed complete mountaineering costumes

and departed.  A week later they returned, pretty well

used up, and my agent handed me the following



Official Report



OF A VISIT TO THE FURKA REGION.  BY H. HARRIS, AGENT



About seven o'clock in the morning, with perfectly

fine weather, we started from Hospenthal, and arrived at

the MAISON on the Furka in a little under QUATRE hours.

The want of variety in the scenery from Hospenthal made

the KAHKAHPONEEKA wearisome; but let none be discouraged;

no one can fail to be completely R'ECOMPENS'EE for

his fatigue, when he sees, for the first time, the monarch

of the Oberland, the tremendous Finsteraarhorn.  A moment

before all was dullness, but a PAS further has placed us

on the summit of the Furka; and exactly in front of us,

at a HOPOW of only fifteen miles, this magnificent mountain

lifts its snow-wreathed precipices into the deep blue sky.

The inferior mountains on each side of the pass form

a sort of frame for the picture of their dread lord,

and close in the view so completely that no other prominent

feature in the Oberland is visible from this BONG-A-BONG;

nothing withdraws the attention from the solitary grandeur

of the Finsteraarhorn and the dependent spurs which form

the abutments of the central peak.



With the addition of some others, who were also bound

for the Grimsel, we formed a large XHVLOJ as we descended

the STEG which winds round the shoulder of a mountain

toward the Rhone Glacier.  We soon left the path and took

to the ice; and after wandering amongst the crevices UN PEU,

to admire the wonders of these deep blue caverns, and hear

the rushing of waters through their subglacial channels,

we struck out a course toward L'AUTRE CO^T'E and crossed

the glacier successfully, a little above the cave from

which the infant Rhone takes its first bound from under

the grand precipice of ice.  Half a mile below this

we began to climb the flowery side of the Meienwand.

One of our party started before the rest, but the HITZE

was so great, that we found IHM quite exhausted,

and lying at full length in the shade of a large GESTEIN.

We sat down with him for a time, for all felt the heat

exceedingly in the climb up this very steep BOLWOGGOLY,

and then we set out again together, and arrived at last

near the Dead Man's Lake, at the foot of the Sidelhorn.

This lonely spot, once used for an extempore burying-place,

after a sanguinary BATTUE between the French and Austrians,

is the perfection of desolation; there is nothing in sight

to mark the hand of man, except the line of weather-beaten

whitened posts, set up to indicate the direction of the pass

in the OWDAWAKK of winter.  Near this point the footpath joins

the wider track, which connects the Grimsel with the head

of the Rhone SCHNAWP; this has been carefully constructed,

and leads with a tortuous course among and over LES PIERRES,

down to the bank of the gloomy little SWOSH-SWOSH, which

almost washes against the walls of the Grimsel Hospice.

We arrived a little before four o'clock at the end

of our day's journey, hot enough to justify the step,

taking by most of the PARTIE, of plunging into the crystal

water of the snow-fed lake.



The next afternoon we started for a walk up the Unteraar glacier,

with the intention of, at all events, getting as far

as the HUETTE which is used as a sleeping-place by most

of those who cross the Strahleck Pass to Grindelwald.

We got over the tedious collection of stones and DE'BRIS

which covers the PIED of the GLETCHER, and had walked

nearly three hours from the Grimsel, when, just as

we were thinking of crossing over to the right,

to climb the cliffs at the foot of the hut, the clouds,

which had for some time assumed a threatening appearance,

suddenly dropped, and a huge mass of them, driving toward

us from the Finsteraarhorn, poured down a deluge of

HABOOLONG and hail.  Fortunately, we were not far from

a very large glacier-table; it was a huge rock balanced

on a pedestal of ice high enough to admit of our all

creeping under it for GOWKARAK.  A stream of PUCKITTYPUKK

had furrowed a course for itself in the ice at its base,

and we were obliged to stand with one FUSS on each side

of this, and endeavor to keep ourselves CHAUD by cutting

steps in the steep bank of the pedestal, so as to get

a higher place for standing on, as the WASSER rose rapidly

in its trench.  A very cold BZZZZZZZZEEE accompanied

the storm, and made our position far from pleasant;

and presently came a flash of BLITZEN, apparently in the

middle of our little party, with an instantaneous clap

of YOKKY, sounding like a large gun fired close to our ears;

the effect was startling; but in a few seconds our attention

was fixed by the roaring echoes of the thunder against

the tremendous mountains which completely surrounded us.

This was followed by many more bursts, none of WELCHE,

however, was so dangerously near; and after waiting a long

DEMI-hour in our icy prison, we sallied out to talk through

a HABOOLONG which, though not so heavy as before, was quite

enough to give us a thorough soaking before our arrival at the

Hospice.



The Grimsel is CERTAINEMENT a wonderful place; situated at

the bottom of a sort of huge crater, the sides of which

are utterly savage GEBIRGE, composed of barren rocks

which cannot even support a single pine ARBRE, and afford

only scanty food for a herd of GMWKWLLOLP, it looks as

if it must be completely BEGRABEN in the winter snows.

Enormous avalanches fall against it every spring,

sometimes covering everything to the depth of thirty

or forty feet; and, in spite of walls four feet thick,

and furnished with outside shutters, the two men who stay here

when the VOYAGEURS are snugly quartered in their distant homes

can tell you that the snow sometimes shakes the house to its

foundations.



Next morning the HOGGLEBUMGULLUP still continued bad,

but we made up our minds to go on, and make the best of it.

Half an hour after we started, the REGEN thickened unpleasantly,

and we attempted to get shelter under a projecting rock,

but being far to NASS already to make standing at all

AGRE'ABLE, we pushed on for the Handeck, consoling ourselves

with the reflection that from the furious rushing

of the river Aar at our side, we should at all events

see the celebrated WASSERFALL in GRANDE PERFECTION.

Nor were we NAPPERSOCKET in our expectation; the water

was roaring down its leap of two hundred and fifty feet

in a most magnificent frenzy, while the trees which cling

to its rocky sides swayed to and fro in the violence of the

hurricane which it brought down with it; even the stream,

which falls into the main cascade at right angles,

and TOUTEFOIS forms a beautiful feature in the scene,

was now swollen into a raging torrent; and the violence

of this "meeting of the waters," about fifty feet below

the frail bridge where we stood, was fearfully grand.

While we were looking at it, GLUECKLICHEWEISE a gleam

of sunshine came out, and instantly a beautiful rainbow

was formed by the spray, and hung in mid-air suspended over

the awful gorge.



On going into the CHALET above the fall, we were

informed that a BRUECKE had broken down near Guttanen,

and that it would be impossible to proceed for some time;

accordingly we were kept in our drenched condition for

EIN STUNDE, when some VOYAGEURS arrived from Meiringen,

and told us that there had been a trifling accident,

ABER that we could now cross.  On arriving at the spot,

I was much inclined to suspect that the whole story was a ruse

to make us SLOWWK and drink the more at the Handeck Inn,

for only a few planks had been carried away, and though

there might perhaps have been some difficulty with mules,

the gap was certainly not larger than a MMBGLX might cross

with a very slight leap.  Near Guttanen the HABOOLONG

happily ceased, and we had time to walk ourselves tolerably

dry before arriving at Reichenback, WO we enjoyed a good DINE'

at the Hotel des Alps.



Next morning we walked to Rosenlaui, the BEAU ID'EAL

of Swiss scenery, where we spent the middle of the day

in an excursion to the glacier.  This was more beautiful

than words can describe, for in the constant progress

of the ice it has changed the form of its extremity

and formed a vast cavern, as blue as the sky above,

and rippled like a frozen ocean.  A few steps cut

in the WHOOPJAMBOREEHOO enabled us to walk completely

under this, and feast our eyes upon one of the loveliest

objects in creation.  The glacier was all around divided

by numberless fissures of the same exquisite color,

and the finest wood-ERDBEEREN were growing in abundance

but a few yards from the ice.  The inn stands in a CHARMANT

spot close to the C^OTE DE LA RIVIE`RE, which, lower down,

forms the Reichenbach fall, and embosomed in the richest

of pine woods, while the fine form of the Wellhorn

looking down upon it completes the enchanting BOPPLE.

In the afternoon we walked over the Great Scheideck

to Grindelwald, stopping to pay a visit to the Upper

glacier by the way; but we were again overtaken by bad

HOGGLEBUMGULLUP and arrived at the hotel in a SOLCHE

a state that the landlord's wardrobe was in great request.



The clouds by this time seemed to have done their worst,

for a lovely day succeeded, which we determined to devote

to an ascent of the Faulhorn.  We left Grindelwald just as

a thunder-storm was dying away, and we hoped to find GUTEN

WETTER up above; but the rain, which had nearly ceased,

began again, and we were struck by the rapidly increasing

FROID as we ascended.  Two-thirds of the way up were

completed when the rain was exchanged for GNILLIC,

with which the BODEN was thickly covered, and before we

arrived at the top the GNILLIC and mist became so thick

that we could not see one another at more than twenty

POOPOO distance, and it became difficult to pick our way over

the rough and thickly covered ground.  Shivering with cold,

we turned into bed with a double allowance of clothes,

and slept comfortably while the wind howled AUTOUR DE

LA MAISON; when I awoke, the wall and the window looked

equally dark, but in another hour I found I could just

see the form of the latter; so I jumped out of bed,

and forced it open, though with great difficulty from

the frost and the quantities of GNILLIC heaped up against it.



A row of huge icicles hung down from the edge of the roof,

and anything more wintry than the whole ANBLICK could

not well be imagined; but the sudden appearance of the

great mountains in front was so startling that I felt no

inclination to move toward bed again.  The snow which had

collected upon LA FENE^TRE had increased the FINSTERNISS

ODER DER DUNKELHEIT, so that when I looked out I was

surprised to find that the daylight was considerable,

and that the BALRAGOOMAH would evidently rise before long.

Only the brightest of LES E'TOILES were still shining;

the sky was cloudless overhead, though small curling

mists lay thousands of feet below us in the valleys,

wreathed around the feet of the mountains, and adding

to the splendor of their lofty summits.  We were soon

dressed and out of the house, watching the gradual approach

of dawn, thoroughly absorbed in the first near view

of the Oberland giants, which broke upon us unexpectedly

after the intense obscurity of the evening before.

"KABAUGWAKKO SONGWASHEE KUM WETTERHORN SNAWPO!" cried some one,

as that grand summit gleamed with the first rose of dawn;

and in a few moments the double crest of the Schreckhorn

followed its example; peak after peak seemed warmed

with life, the Jungfrau blushed even more beautifully

than her neighbors, and soon, from the Wetterhorn in the

east to the Wildstrubel in the west, a long row of fires

glowed upon mighty altars, truly worthy of the gods.

The WLGW was very severe; our sleeping-place could

hardly be DISTINGUEE' from the snow around it, which had

fallen to a depth of a FLIRK during the past evening,

and we heartily enjoyed a rough scramble EN BAS to the

Giesbach falls, where we soon found a warm climate.

At noon the day before Grindelwald the thermometer could

not have stood at less than 100 degrees Fahr.  in the sun;

and in the evening, judging from the icicles formed,

and the state of the windows, there must have been at least

twelve DINGBLATTER of frost, thus giving a change of 80

degrees during a few hours.



I said:



"You have done well, Harris; this report is concise,

compact, well expressed; the language is crisp,

the descriptions are vivid and not needlessly elaborated;

your report goes straight to the point, attends strictly

to business, and doesn't fool around.  It is in many

ways an excellent document.  But it has a fault--it

is too learned, it is much too learned.  What is 'DINGBLATTER'?



"'DINGBLATTER' is a Fiji word meaning 'degrees.'"



"You knew the English of it, then?"



"Oh, yes."



"What is 'GNILLIC'?



"That is the Eskimo term for 'snow.'"



"So you knew the English for that, too?"



"Why, certainly."



"What does 'MMBGLX' stand for?"



"That is Zulu for 'pedestrian.'"



"'While the form of the Wellhorn looking down upon it

completes the enchanting BOPPLE.' What is 'BOPPLE'?"



"'Picture.' It's Choctaw."



"What is 'SCHNAWP'?"



"'Valley.' That is Choctaw, also."



"What is 'BOLWOGGOLY'?"



"That is Chinese for 'hill.'"



"'KAHKAHPONEEKA'?"



"'Ascent.' Choctaw."



"'But we were again overtaken by bad HOGGLEBUMGULLUP.'

What does 'HOGGLEBUMGULLUP' mean?"



"That is Chinese for 'weather.'"



"Is 'HOGGLEBUMGULLUP' better than the English word? Is

it any more descriptive?"



"No, it means just the same."



"And 'DINGBLATTER' and 'GNILLIC,' and 'BOPPLE,'

and 'SCHNAWP'--are they better than the English words?"



"No, they mean just what the English ones do."



"Then why do you use them? Why have you used all this

Chinese and Choctaw and Zulu rubbish?"



"Because I didn't know any French but two or three words,

and I didn't know any Latin or Greek at all."



"That is nothing.  Why should you want to use foreign words,

anyhow?"



"They adorn my page.  They all do it."



"Who is 'all'?"



"Everybody. Everybody that writes elegantly.  Anybody has

a right to that wants to."



"I think you are mistaken." I then proceeded in the following

scathing manner.  "When really learned men write books

for other learned men to read, they are justified in using

as many learned words as they please--their audience

will understand them; but a man who writes a book for the

general public to read is not justified in disfiguring

his pages with untranslated foreign expressions.

It is an insolence toward the majority of the purchasers,

for it is a very frank and impudent way of saying,

'Get the translations made yourself if you want them,

this book is not written for the ignorant classes.' There are

men who know a foreign language so well and have used it

so long in their daily life that they seem to discharge whole

volleys of it into their English writings unconsciously,

and so they omit to translate, as much as half the time.

That is a great cruelty to nine out of ten of the

man's readers.  What is the excuse for this? The writer

would say he only uses the foreign language where the

delicacy of his point cannot be conveyed in English.

Very well, then he writes his best things for the tenth man,

and he ought to warn the nine other not to buy his book.

However, the excuse he offers is at least an excuse;

but there is another set of men who are like YOU;

they know a WORD here and there, of a foreign language,

or a few beggarly little three-word phrases, filched from

the back of the Dictionary, and these are continually

peppering into their literature, with a pretense of

knowing that language--what excuse can they offer? The

foreign words and phrases which they use have their exact

equivalents in a nobler language--English; yet they think

they 'adorn their page' when they say STRASSE for street,

and BAHNHOF for railway-station, and so on--flaunting

these fluttering rags of poverty in the reader's face

and imagining he will be ass enough to take them for the

sign of untold riches held in reserve.  I will let your

'learning' remain in your report; you have as much right,

I suppose, to 'adorn your page' with Zulu and Chinese

and Choctaw rubbish as others of your sort have to adorn

theirs with insolent odds and ends smouched from half

a dozen learned tongues whose A-B ABS they don't even know."



When the musing spider steps upon the red-hot shovel,

he first exhibits a wild surprise, then he shrivels up.

Similar was the effect of these blistering words upon the

tranquil and unsuspecting Agent.  I can be dreadfully rough

on a person when the mood takes me.







CHAPTER XXXI

[Alp-scaling by Carriage]



We now prepared for a considerable walk--from Lucerne

to Interlaken, over the Bruenig Pass.  But at the last moment

the weather was so good that I changed my mind and hired

a four-horse carriage.  It was a huge vehicle, roomy, as easy

in its motion as a palanquin, and exceedingly comfortable.



We got away pretty early in the morning, after a hot breakfast,

and went bowling over a hard, smooth road, through the summer

loveliness of Switzerland, with near and distant lakes

and mountains before and about us for the entertainment

of the eye, and the music of multitudinous birds to charm

the ear.  Sometimes there was only the width of the road

between the imposing precipices on the right and the clear

cool water on the left with its shoals of uncatchable

fish skimming about through the bars of sun and shadow;

and sometimes, in place of the precipices, the grassy land

stretched away, in an apparently endless upward slant,

and was dotted everywhere with snug little chalets,

the peculiarly captivating cottage of Switzerland.



The ordinary chalet turns a broad, honest gable end

to the road, and its ample roof hovers over the home

in a protecting, caressing way, projecting its sheltering

eaves far outward.  The quaint windows are filled with

little panes, and garnished with white muslin curtains,

and brightened with boxes of blooming flowers.

Across the front of the house, and up the spreading eaves

and along the fanciful railings of the shallow porch,

are elaborate carvings--wreaths, fruits, arabesques,

verses from Scripture, names, dates, etc.  The building

is wholly of wood, reddish brown in tint, a very

pleasing color.  It generally has vines climbing over it.

Set such a house against the fresh green of the hillside,

and it looks ever so cozy and inviting and picturesque,

and is a decidedly graceful addition to the landscape.



One does not find out what a hold the chalet has taken

upon him, until he presently comes upon a new house

--a house which is aping the town fashions of Germany

and France, a prim, hideous, straight-up-and-down thing,

plastered all over on the outside to look like stone,

and altogether so stiff, and formal, and ugly, and forbidding,

and so out of tune with the gracious landscape, and so deaf

and dumb and dead to the poetry of its surroundings,

that it suggests an undertaker at a picnic, a corpse at

a wedding, a puritan in Paradise.



In the course of the morning we passed the spot where Pontius

Pilate is said to have thrown himself into the lake.

The legend goes that after the Crucifixion his conscience

troubled him, and he fled from Jerusalem and wandered

about the earth, weary of life and a prey to tortures of

the mind.  Eventually, he hid himself away, on the heights

of Mount Pilatus, and dwelt alone among the clouds and

crags for years; but rest and peace were still denied him,

so he finally put an end to his misery by drowning himself.



Presently we passed the place where a man of better odor

was born.  This was the children's friend, Santa Claus,

or St. Nicholas.  There are some unaccountable reputations

in the world.  This saint's is an instance.  He has

ranked for ages as the peculiar friend of children,

yet it appears he was not much of a friend to his own.

He had ten of them, and when fifty years old he left them,

and sought out as dismal a refuge from the world as possible,

and became a hermit in order that he might reflect upon

pious themes without being disturbed by the joyous and other

noises from the nursery, doubtless.



Judging by Pilate and St. Nicholas, there exists no rule

for the construction of hermits; they seem made out of all

kinds of material.  But Pilate attended to the matter of

expiating his sin while he was alive, whereas St. Nicholas

will probably have to go on climbing down sooty chimneys,

Christmas eve, forever, and conferring kindness on other

people's children, to make up for deserting his own.

His bones are kept in a church in a village (Sachseln)

which we visited, and are naturally held in great reverence.

His portrait is common in the farmhouses of the region,

but is believed by many to be but an indifferent likeness.

During his hermit life, according to legend, he partook

of the bread and wine of the communion once a month,

but all the rest of the month he fasted.



A constant marvel with us, as we sped along the bases

of the steep mountains on this journey, was, not that

avalanches occur, but that they are not occurring all

the time.  One does not understand why rocks and landslides

do not plunge down these declivities daily.  A landslip

occurred three quarters of a century ago, on the route

from Arth to Brunnen, which was a formidable thing.

A mass of conglomerate two miles long, a thousand feet broad,

and a hundred feet thick, broke away from a cliff three

thousand feet high and hurled itself into the valley below,

burying four villages and five hundred people, as in a grave.



We had such a beautiful day, and such endless pictures

of limpid lakes, and green hills and valleys,

and majestic mountains, and milky cataracts dancing

down the steeps and gleaming in the sun, that we could

not help feeling sweet toward all the world; so we tried

to drink all the milk, and eat all the grapes and apricots

and berries, and buy all the bouquets of wild flowers

which the little peasant boys and girls offered for sale;

but we had to retire from this contract, for it was too heavy.



At short distances--and they were entirely too short--all

along the road, were groups of neat and comely children,

with their wares nicely and temptingly set forth

in the grass under the shade trees, and as soon as we

approached they swarmed into the road, holding out their

baskets and milk bottles, and ran beside the carriage,

barefoot and bareheaded, and importuned us to buy.

They seldom desisted early, but continued to run and

insist--beside the wagon while they could, and behind

it until they lost breath.  Then they turned and chased

a returning carriage back to their trading-post again.

After several hours of this, without any intermission,

it becomes almost annoying.  I do not know what we

should have done without the returning carriages to draw

off the pursuit.  However, there were plenty of these,

loaded with dusty tourists and piled high with luggage.

Indeed, from Lucerne to Interlaken we had the spectacle,

among other scenery, of an unbroken procession of

fruit-peddlers and tourists carriages.



Our talk was mostly anticipatory of what we should see

on the down-grade of the Bruenig, by and by, after we

should pass the summit.  All our friends in Lucerne had

said that to look down upon Meiringen, and the rushing

blue-gray river Aar, and the broad level green valley;

and across at the mighty Alpine precipices that rise

straight up to the clouds out of that valley; and up

at the microscopic chalets perched upon the dizzy eaves

of those precipices and winking dimly and fitfully

through the drifting veil of vapor; and still up and up,

at the superb Oltschiback and the other beautiful cascades

that leap from those rugged heights, robed in powdery spray,

ruffled with foam, and girdled with rainbows--to look upon

these things, they say, was to look upon the last possibility

of the sublime and the enchanting.  Therefore, as I say,

we talked mainly of these coming wonders; if we were conscious

of any impatience, it was to get there in favorable season;

if we felt any anxiety, it was that the day might

remain perfect, and enable us to see those marvels at their best.





As we approached the Kaiserstuhl, a part of the harness gave way.



We were in distress for a moment, but only a moment.

It was the fore-and-aft gear that was broken--the thing

that leads aft from the forward part of the horse and is

made fast to the thing that pulls the wagon.  In America

this would have been a heavy leathern strap; but, all over

the continent it is nothing but a piece of rope the size

of your little finger--clothes-line is what it is.

Cabs use it, private carriages, freight-carts and wagons,

all sorts of vehicles have it.  In Munich I afterward saw

it used on a long wagon laden with fifty-four half-barrels

of beer; I had before noticed that the cabs in Heidelberg

used it--not new rope, but rope that had been in use

since Abraham's time --and I had felt nervous, sometimes,

behind it when the cab was tearing down a hill.  But I

had long been accustomed to it now, and had even become

afraid of the leather strap which belonged in its place.

Our driver got a fresh piece of clothes-line out of his

locker and repaired the break in two minutes.



So much for one European fashion.  Every country has its

own ways.  It may interest the reader to know how they "put

horses to" on the continent.  The man stands up the horses

on each side of the thing that projects from the front end

of the wagon, and then throws the tangled mess of gear

forward through a ring, and hauls it aft, and passes the

other thing through the other ring and hauls it aft on the

other side of the other horse, opposite to the first one,

after crossing them and bringing the loose end back,

and then buckles the other thing underneath the horse,

and takes another thing and wraps it around the thing I spoke

of before, and puts another thing over each horse's head,

with broad flappers to it to keep the dust out of his eyes,

and puts the iron thing in his mouth for him to grit his

teeth on, uphill, and brings the ends of these things aft

over his back, after buckling another one around under

his neck to hold his head up, and hitching another thing

on a thing that goes over his shoulders to keep his head

up when he is climbing a hill, and then takes the slack

of the thing which I mentioned a while ago, and fetches it

aft and makes it fast to the thing that pulls the wagon,

and hands the other things up to the driver to steer with.

I never have buckled up a horse myself, but I do not think

we do it that way.



We had four very handsome horses, and the driver was very proud

of his turnout.  He would bowl along on a reasonable trot,

on the highway, but when he entered a village he did it on

a furious run, and accompanied it with a frenzy of ceaseless

whip-crackings that sounded like volleys of musketry.

He tore through the narrow streets and around the sharp

curves like a moving earthquake, showering his volleys

as he went, and before him swept a continuous tidal wave

of scampering children, ducks, cats, and mothers clasping

babies which they had snatched out of the way of the

coming destruction; and as this living wave washed aside,

along the walls, its elements, being safe, forgot their fears

and turned their admiring gaze upon that gallant driver

till he thundered around the next curve and was lost to sight.



He was a great man to those villagers, with his gaudy

clothes and his terrific ways.  Whenever he stopped

to have his cattle watered and fed with loaves of bread,

the villagers stood around admiring him while he

swaggered about, the little boys gazed up at his face with

humble homage, and the landlord brought out foaming mugs

of beer and conversed proudly with him while he drank.

Then he mounted his lofty box, swung his explosive whip,

and away he went again, like a storm.  I had not seen

anything like this before since I was a boy, and the

stage used to flourish the village with the dust flying

and the horn tooting.



When we reached the base of the Kaiserstuhl, we took

two more horses; we had to toil along with difficulty

for an hour and a half or two hours, for the ascent

was not very gradual, but when we passed the backbone

and approached the station, the driver surpassed all

his previous efforts in the way of rush and clatter.

He could not have six horses all the time, so he made

the most of his chance while he had it.



Up to this point we had been in the heart of the William

Tell region.  The hero is not forgotten, by any means,

or held in doubtful veneration.  His wooden image,

with his bow drawn, above the doors of taverns, was a

frequent feature of the scenery.



About noon we arrived at the foot of the Bruenig Pass,

and made a two-hour stop at the village hotel, another of

those clean, pretty, and thoroughly well-kept inns which are

such an astonishment to people who are accustomed to hotels

of a dismally different pattern in remote country-towns.

There was a lake here, in the lap of the great mountains,

the green slopes that rose toward the lower crags

were graced with scattered Swiss cottages nestling

among miniature farms and gardens, and from out a leafy

ambuscade in the upper heights tumbled a brawling cataract.



Carriage after carriage, laden with tourists and trunks,

arrived, and the quiet hotel was soon populous.

We were early at the table d'ho^te and saw the people

all come in.  There were twenty-five, perhaps.  They were

of various nationalities, but we were the only Americans.

Next to me sat an English bride, and next to her sat her

new husband, whom she called "Neddy," though he was big

enough and stalwart enough to be entitled to his full name.

They had a pretty little lovers' quarrel over what wine

they should have.  Neddy was for obeying the guide-book

and taking the wine of the country; but the bride said:



"What, that nahsty stuff!"



"It isn't nahsty, pet, it's quite good."



"It IS nahsty."



"No, it ISN'T nahsty."



"It's Oful nahsty, Neddy, and I shahn't drink it."



Then the question was, what she must have.  She said he

knew very well that she never drank anything but champagne.



She added:



"You know very well papa always has champagne on his table,

and I've always been used to it."



Neddy made a playful pretense of being distressed about

the expense, and this amused her so much that she nearly

exhausted herself with laughter--and this pleased HIM

so much that he repeated his jest a couple of times,

and added new and killing varieties to it.  When the bride

finally recovered, she gave Neddy a love-box on the arm

with her fan, and said with arch severity:



"Well, you would HAVE me--nothing else would do

--so you'll have to make the best of a bad bargain.

DO order the champagne, I'm Oful dry."



So with a mock groan which made her laugh again,

Neddy ordered the champagne.



The fact that this young woman had never moistened

the selvedge edge of her soul with a less plebeian

tipple than champagne, had a marked and subduing effect

on Harris.  He believed she belonged to the royal family.

But I had my doubts.



We heard two or three different languages spoken by

people at the table and guessed out the nationalities

of most of the guests to our satisfaction, but we

failed with an elderly gentleman and his wife and a

young girl who sat opposite us, and with a gentleman

of about thirty-five who sat three seats beyond Harris.

We did not hear any of these speak.  But finally the

last-named gentleman left while we were not noticing,

but we looked up as he reached the far end of the table.

He stopped there a moment, and made his toilet with a

pocket comb.  So he was a German; or else he had lived

in German hotels long enough to catch the fashion.

When the elderly couple and the young girl rose to leave,

they bowed respectfully to us.  So they were Germans, too.

This national custom is worth six of the other one,

for export.



After dinner we talked with several Englishmen, and they

inflamed our desire to a hotter degree than ever,

to see the sights of Meiringen from the heights of

the Bruenig Pass.  They said the view was marvelous,

and that one who had seen it once could never forget it.

They also spoke of the romantic nature of the road over

the pass, and how in one place it had been cut through

a flank of the solid rock, in such a way that the mountain

overhung the tourist as he passed by; and they furthermore

said that the sharp turns in the road and the abruptness

of the descent would afford us a thrilling experience,

for we should go down in a flying gallop and seem to be

spinning around the rings of a whirlwind, like a drop

of whiskey descending the spirals of a corkscrew.

I got all the information out of these gentlemen that we

could need; and then, to make everything complete, I asked

them if a body could get hold of a little fruit and milk

here and there, in case of necessity.  They threw up their

hands in speechless intimation that the road was simply paved

with refreshment-peddlers. We were impatient to get away,

now, and the rest of our two-hour stop rather dragged.

But finally the set time arrived and we began the ascent.

Indeed it was a wonderful road.  It was smooth, and compact,

and clean, and the side next the precipices was guarded

all along by dressed stone posts about three feet high,

placed at short distances apart.  The road could not have

been better built if Napoleon the First had built it.

He seems to have been the introducer of the sort of roads

which Europe now uses.  All literature which describes

life as it existed in England, France, and Germany up

to the close of the last century, is filled with pictures

of coaches and carriages wallowing through these three

countries in mud and slush half-wheel deep; but after

Napoleon had floundered through a conquered kingdom he

generally arranged things so that the rest of the world

could follow dry-shod.



We went on climbing, higher and higher, and curving hither

and thither, in the shade of noble woods, and with a rich

variety and profusion of wild flowers all about us;

and glimpses of rounded grassy backbones below us occupied

by trim chalets and nibbling sheep, and other glimpses

of far lower altitudes, where distance diminished the

chalets to toys and obliterated the sheep altogether;

and every now and then some ermined monarch of the Alps

swung magnificently into view for a moment, then drifted

past an intervening spur and disappeared again.



It was an intoxicating trip altogether; the exceeding

sense of satisfaction that follows a good dinner added

largely to the enjoyment; the having something especial

to look forward to and muse about, like the approaching

grandeurs of Meiringen, sharpened the zest.  Smoking was

never so good before, solid comfort was never solider;

we lay back against the thick cushions silent, meditative,

steeped in felicity.



I rubbed my eyes, opened them, and started.  I had been

dreaming I was at sea, and it was a thrilling surprise to wake

up and find land all around me.  It took me a couple seconds

to "come to," as you may say; then I took in the situation.

The horses were drinking at a trough in the edge of a town,

the driver was taking beer, Harris was snoring at my side,

the courier, with folded arms and bowed head, was sleeping

on the box, two dozen barefooted and bareheaded children

were gathered about the carriage, with their hands

crossed behind, gazing up with serious and innocent

admiration at the dozing tourists baking there in the sun.

Several small girls held night-capped babies nearly

as big as themselves in their arms, and even these fat

babies seemed to take a sort of sluggish interest in us.



We had slept an hour and a half and missed all the scenery!

I did not need anybody to tell me that.  If I had been

a girl, I could have cursed for vexation.  As it was,

I woke up the agent and gave him a piece of my mind.

Instead of being humiliated, he only upbraided me for being

so wanting in vigilance.  He said he had expected to improve

his mind by coming to Europe, but a man might travel to the

ends of the earth with me and never see anything, for I

was manifestly endowed with the very genius of ill luck.

He even tried to get up some emotion about that poor courier,

who never got a chance to see anything, on account of

my heedlessness.  But when I thought I had borne about

enough of this kind of talk, I threatened to make Harris

tramp back to the summit and make a report on that scenery,

and this suggestion spiked his battery.



We drove sullenly through Brienz, dead to the seductions

of its bewildering array of Swiss carvings and the

clamorous HOO-hooing of its cuckoo clocks, and had not

entirely recovered our spirits when we rattled across

a bridge over the rushing blue river and entered the

pretty town of Interlaken.  It was just about sunset,

and we had made the trip from Lucerne in ten hours.







CHAPTER XXXII

[The Jungfrau, the Bride, and the Piano]



We located ourselves at the Jungfrau Hotel, one of those

huge establishments which the needs of modern travel

have created in every attractive spot on the continent.

There was a great gathering at dinner, and, as usual,

one heard all sorts of languages.



The table d'ho^te was served by waitresses dressed

in the quaint and comely costume of the Swiss peasants.

This consists of a simple gros de laine, trimmed with ashes

of roses, with overskirt of scare bleu ventre saint gris,

cut bias on the off-side, with facings of petit polonaise

and narrow insertions of pa^te de foie gras backstitched

to the mise en sce`ne in the form of a jeu d'esprit. It gives

to the wearer a singularly piquant and alluring aspect.



One of these waitresses, a woman of forty,

had side-whiskers reaching half-way down her jaws.

They were two fingers broad, dark in color, pretty thick,

and the hairs were an inch long.  One sees many women on

the continent with quite conspicuous mustaches, but this

was the only woman I saw who had reached the dignity of whiskers.





After dinner the guests of both sexes distributed themselves

about the front porches and the ornamental grounds belonging

to the hotel, to enjoy the cool air; but, as the twilight

deepened toward darkness, they gathered themselves together

in that saddest and solemnest and most constrained of

all places, the great blank drawing-room which is the chief

feature of all continental summer hotels.  There they

grouped themselves about, in couples and threes, and mumbled

in bated voices, and looked timid and homeless and forlorn.



There was a small piano in this room, a clattery, wheezy,

asthmatic thing, certainly the very worst miscarriage

in the way of a piano that the world has seen.  In turn,

five or six dejected and homesick ladies approached

it doubtingly, gave it a single inquiring thump, and retired

with the lockjaw.  But the boss of that instrument was

to come, nevertheless; and from my own country--from Arkansaw.



She was a brand-new bride, innocent, girlish, happy in herself

and her grave and worshiping stripling of a husband; she was

about eighteen, just out of school, free from affections,

unconscious of that passionless multitude around her;

and the very first time she smote that old wreck one

recognized that it had met its destiny.  Her stripling

brought an armful of aged sheet-music from their room

--for this bride went "heeled," as you might say--and bent

himself lovingly over and got ready to turn the pages.



The bride fetched a swoop with her fingers from one end

of the keyboard to the other, just to get her bearings,

as it were, and you could see the congregation set their teeth

with the agony of it.  Then, without any more preliminaries,

she turned on all the horrors of the "Battle of Prague,"

that venerable shivaree, and waded chin-deep in the blood

of the slain.  She made a fair and honorable average

of two false notes in every five, but her soul was in arms

and she never stopped to correct.  The audience stood it

with pretty fair grit for a while, but when the cannonade

waxed hotter and fiercer, and the discord average

rose to four in five, the procession began to move.

A few stragglers held their ground ten minutes longer,

but when the girl began to wring the true inwardness out

of the "cries of the wounded," they struck their colors

and retired in a kind of panic.



There never was a completer victory; I was the only

non-combatant left on the field.  I would not have

deserted my countrywoman anyhow, but indeed I had no

desires in that direction.  None of us like mediocrity,

but we all reverence perfection.  This girl's music

was perfection in its way; it was the worst music that

had ever been achieved on our planet by a mere human being.



I moved up close, and never lost a strain.  When she

got through, I asked her to play it again.  She did it

with a pleased alacrity and a heightened enthusiasm.

She made it ALL discords, this time.  She got an amount

of anguish into the cries of the wounded that shed a new

light on human suffering.  She was on the war-path all

the evening.  All the time, crowds of people gathered on

the porches and pressed their noses against the windows

to look and marvel, but the bravest never ventured in.

The bride went off satisfied and happy with her young fellow,

when her appetite was finally gorged, and the tourists

swarmed in again.



What a change has come over Switzerland, and in fact

all Europe, during this century! Seventy or eighty years

ago Napoleon was the only man in Europe who could really

be called a traveler; he was the only man who had devoted

his attention to it and taken a powerful interest in it;

he was the only man who had traveled extensively;

but now everybody goes everywhere; and Switzerland,

and many other regions which were unvisited and unknown

remotenesses a hundred years ago, are in our days

a buzzing hive of restless strangers every summer.

But I digress.



In the morning, when we looked out of our windows,

we saw a wonderful sight.  Across the valley,

and apparently quite neighborly and close at hand,

the giant form of the Jungfrau rose cold and white into

the clear sky, beyond a gateway in the nearer highlands.

It reminded me, somehow, of one of those colossal billows

which swells suddenly up beside one's ship, at sea,

sometimes, with its crest and shoulders snowy white, and the

rest of its noble proportions streaked downward with creamy foam.





I took out my sketch-book and made a little picture

of the Jungfrau, merely to get the shape.  [Figure 9]



I do not regard this as one of my finished works, in fact I

do not rank it among my Works at all; it is only a study;

it is hardly more than what one might call a sketch.

Other artists have done me the grace to admire it; but I

am severe in my judgments of my own pictures, and this

one does not move me.



It was hard to believe that that lofty wooded rampart on

the left which so overtops the Jungfrau was not actually

the higher of the two, but it was not, of course.

It is only two or three thousand feet high, and of course

has no snow upon it in summer, whereas the Jungfrau is not

much shorter of fourteen thousand feet high and therefore

that lowest verge of snow on her side, which seems nearly

down to the valley level, is really about seven thousand feet

higher up in the air than the summit of that wooded rampart.

It is the distance that makes the deception.  The wooded

height is but four or five miles removed from us,

but the Jungfrau is four or five times that distance away.



Walking down the street of shops, in the fore-noon, I

was attracted by a large picture, carved, frame and all,

from a single block of chocolate-colored wood.

There are people who know everything.  Some of these had

told us that continental shopkeepers always raise their

prices on English and Americans.  Many people had told

us it was expensive to buy things through a courier,

whereas I had supposed it was just the reverse.

When I saw this picture, I conjectured that it was worth

more than the friend I proposed to buy it for would

like to pay, but still it was worth while to inquire;

so I told the courier to step in and ask the price, as if he

wanted it for himself; I told him not to speak in English,

and above all not to reveal the fact that he was a courier.

Then I moved on a few yards, and waited.



The courier came presently and reported the price.

I said to myself, "It is a hundred francs too much,"

and so dismissed the matter from my mind.  But in

the afternoon I was passing that place with Harris,

and the picture attracted me again.  We stepped in,

to see how much higher broken German would raise the price.

The shopwoman named a figure just a hundred francs lower

than the courier had named.  This was a pleasant surprise.

I said I would take it.  After I had given directions as to

where it was to be shipped, the shopwoman said, appealingly:



"If you please, do not let your courier know you bought it."



This was an unexpected remark.  I said:



"What makes you think I have a courier?"



"Ah, that is very simple; he told me himself."



"He was very thoughtful.  But tell me--why did you charge

him more than you are charging me?"



"That is very simple, also: I do not have to pay you

a percentage."



"Oh, I begin to see.  You would have had to pay the courier

a percentage."



"Undoubtedly. The courier always has his percentage.

In this case it would have been a hundred francs."



"Then the tradesman does not pay a part of it

--the purchaser pays all of it?"



"There are occasions when the tradesman and the courier

agree upon a price which is twice or thrice the value of

the article, then the two divide, and both get a percentage."



"I see.  But it seems to me that the purchaser does

all the paying, even then."



"Oh, to be sure! It goes without saying."



"But I have bought this picture myself; therefore why

shouldn't the courier know it?"



The woman exclaimed, in distress:



"Ah, indeed it would take all my little profit! He would

come and demand his hundred francs, and I should have

to pay."



"He has not done the buying.  You could refuse."



"I could not dare to refuse.  He would never bring

travelers here again.  More than that, he would denounce me

to the other couriers, they would divert custom from me,

and my business would be injured."



I went away in a thoughtful frame of mind.  I began to see why

a courier could afford to work for fifty-five dollars a month

and his fares.  A month or two later I was able to understand

why a courier did not have to pay any board and lodging,

and why my hotel bills were always larger when I had him

with me than when I left him behind, somewhere, for a few days.



Another thing was also explained, now, apparently.

In one town I had taken the courier to the bank to do

the translating when I drew some money.  I had sat

in the reading-room till the transaction was finished.

Then a clerk had brought the money to me in person,

and had been exceedingly polite, even going so far as to

precede me to the door and holding it open for me and bow

me out as if I had been a distinguished personage.

It was a new experience.  Exchange had been in my favor

ever since I had been in Europe, but just that one time.

I got simply the face of my draft, and no extra francs,

whereas I had expected to get quite a number of them.

This was the first time I had ever used the courier at

the bank.  I had suspected something then, and as long

as he remained with me afterward I managed bank matters

by myself.



Still, if I felt that I could afford the tax, I would

never travel without a courier, for a good courier is

a convenience whose value cannot be estimated in dollars

and cents.  Without him, travel is a bitter harassment,

a purgatory of little exasperating annoyances, a ceaseless

and pitiless punishment--I mean to an irascible man

who has no business capacity and is confused by details.



Without a courier, travel hasn't a ray of pleasure

in it, anywhere; but with him it is a continuous and

unruffled delight.  He is always at hand, never has to be

sent for; if your bell is not answered promptly--and it

seldom is--you have only to open the door and speak,

the courier will hear, and he will have the order attended

to or raise an insurrection.  You tell him what day

you will start, and whither you are going--leave all

the rest to him.  You need not inquire about trains,

or fares, or car changes, or hotels, or anything else.

At the proper time he will put you in a cab or an omnibus,

and drive you to the train or the boat; he has packed your

luggage and transferred it, he has paid all the bills.

Other people have preceded you half an hour to scramble

for impossible places and lose their tempers, but you can

take your time; the courier has secured your seats for you,

and you can occupy them at your leisure.



At the station, the crowd mash one another to pulp in the

effort to get the weigher's attention to their trunks;

they dispute hotly with these tyrants, who are cool

and indifferent; they get their baggage billets, at last,

and then have another squeeze and another rage over the

disheartening business of trying to get them recorded and

paid for, and still another over the equally disheartening

business of trying to get near enough to the ticket

office to buy a ticket; and now, with their tempers gone

to the dogs, they must stand penned up and packed together,

laden with wraps and satchels and shawl-straps, with the

weary wife and babies, in the waiting-room, till the doors

are thrown open--and then all hands make a grand final

rush to the train, find it full, and have to stand on

the platform and fret until some more cars are put on.

They are in a condition to kill somebody by this time.

Meantime, you have been sitting in your car, smoking,

and observing all this misery in the extremest comfort.



On the journey the guard is polite and watchful--won't

allow anybody to get into your compartment--tells them

you are just recovering from the small-pox and do not

like to be disturbed.  For the courier has made everything

right with the guard.  At way-stations the courier comes

to your compartment to see if you want a glass of water,

or a newspaper, or anything; at eating-stations he sends

luncheon out to you, while the other people scramble

and worry in the dining-rooms. If anything breaks about

the car you are in, and a station-master proposes to pack

you and your agent into a compartment with strangers,

the courier reveals to him confidentially that you are

a French duke born deaf and dumb, and the official comes

and makes affable signs that he has ordered a choice car

to be added to the train for you.



At custom-houses the multitude file tediously through,

hot and irritated, and look on while the officers

burrow into the trunks and make a mess of everything;

but you hand your keys to the courier and sit still.

Perhaps you arrive at your destination in a rain-storm

at ten at night--you generally do.  The multitude

spend half an hour verifying their baggage and getting

it transferred to the omnibuses; but the courier puts

you into a vehicle without a moment's loss of time,

and when you reach your hotel you find your rooms have been

secured two or three days in advance, everything is ready,

you can go at once to bed.  Some of those other people will

have to drift around to two or three hotels, in the rain,

before they find accommodations.



I have not set down half of the virtues that are

vested in a good courier, but I think I have set down

a sufficiency of them to show that an irritable man

who can afford one and does not employ him is not a

wise economist.  My courier was the worst one in Europe,

yet he was a good deal better than none at all.

It could not pay him to be a better one than he was,

because I could not afford to buy things through him.

He was a good enough courier for the small amount he

got out of his service.  Yes, to travel with a courier

is bliss, to travel without one is the reverse.



I have had dealings with some very bad couriers; but I have also

had dealings with one who might fairly be called perfection.

He was a young Polander, named Joseph N. Verey.  He spoke

eight languages, and seemed to be equally at home in all

of them; he was shrewd, prompt, posted, and punctual;

he was fertile in resources, and singularly gifted in

the matter of overcoming difficulties; he not only knew

how to do everything in his line, but he knew the best ways

and the quickest; he was handy with children and invalids;

all his employer needed to do was to take life easy

and leave everything to the courier.  His address is,

care of Messrs.  Gay & Son, Strand, London; he was formerly

a conductor of Gay's tourist parties.  Excellent couriers

are somewhat rare; if the reader is about to travel,

he will find it to his advantage to make a note of this one.







CHAPTER XXXIII

[We Climb Far--by Buggy]



The beautiful Giesbach Fall is near Interlaken, on the

other side of the lake of Brienz, and is illuminated

every night with those gorgeous theatrical fires whose

name I cannot call just at this moment.  This was said

to be a spectacle which the tourist ought by no means

to miss.  I was strongly tempted, but I could not go

there with propriety, because one goes in a boat.

The task which I had set myself was to walk over Europe

on foot, not skim over it in a boat.  I had made a tacit

contract with myself; it was my duty to abide by it.

I was willing to make boat trips for pleasure, but I could

not conscientiously make them in the way of business.



It cost me something of a pang to lose that fine sight,

but I lived down the desire, and gained in my self-respect

through the triumph.  I had a finer and a grander sight,

however, where I was.  This was the mighty dome of the Jungfrau

softly outlined against the sky and faintly silvered by

the starlight.  There was something subduing in the influence

of that silent and solemn and awful presence; one seemed

to meet the immutable, the indestructible, the eternal,

face to face, and to feel the trivial and fleeting nature

of his own existence the more sharply by the contrast.

One had the sense of being under the brooding contemplation

of a spirit, not an inert mass of rocks and ice--a spirit

which had looked down, through the slow drift of the ages,

upon a million vanished races of men, and judged them;

and would judge a million more--and still be there,

watching, unchanged and unchangeable, after all life

should be gone and the earth have become a vacant desolation.



While I was feeling these things, I was groping,

without knowing it, toward an understanding of what the

spell is which people find in the Alps, and in no other

mountains--that strange, deep, nameless influence, which,

once felt, cannot be forgotten--once felt, leaves always

behind it a restless longing to feel it again--a longing

which is like homesickness; a grieving, haunting yearning

which will plead, implore, and persecute till it has its will.

I met dozens of people, imaginative and unimaginative,

cultivated and uncultivated, who had come from far countries

and roamed through the Swiss Alps year after year--they

could not explain why.  They had come first, they said,

out of idle curiosity, because everybody talked about it;

they had come since because they could not help it, and they

should keep on coming, while they lived, for the same reason;

they had tried to break their chains and stay away,

but it was futile; now, they had no desire to break them.

Others came nearer formulating what they felt; they said they

could find perfect rest and peace nowhere else when they

were troubled: all frets and worries and chafings sank to

sleep in the presence of the benignant serenity of the Alps;

the Great Spirit of the Mountain breathed his own peace

upon their hurt minds and sore hearts, and healed them;

they could not think base thoughts or do mean and sordid

things here, before the visible throne of God.



Down the road a piece was a Kursaal--whatever that may be

--and we joined the human tide to see what sort of enjoyment

it might afford.  It was the usual open-air concert,

in an ornamental garden, with wines, beer, milk, whey,

grapes, etc.--the whey and the grapes being necessaries

of life to certain invalids whom physicians cannot repair,

and who only continue to exist by the grace of whey

or grapes.  One of these departed spirits told me,

in a sad and lifeless way, that there is no way for him

to live but by whey, and dearly, dearly loved whey,

he didn't know whey he did, but he did.  After making

this pun he died--that is the whey it served him.



Some other remains, preserved from decomposition

by the grape system, told me that the grapes were of

a peculiar breed, highly medicinal in their nature,

and that they were counted out and administered by the

grape-doctors as methodically as if they were pills.

The new patient, if very feeble, began with one grape

before breakfast, took three during breakfast, a couple

between meals, five at luncheon, three in the afternoon,

seven at dinner, four for supper, and part of a grape

just before going to bed, by way of a general regulator.

The quantity was gradually and regularly increased,

according to the needs and capacities of the patient,

until by and by you would find him disposing of his one

grape per second all the day long, and his regular barrel

per day.



He said that men cured in this way, and enabled to discard

the grape system, never afterward got over the habit

of talking as if they were dictating to a slow amanuensis,

because they always made a pause between each two words

while they sucked the substance out of an imaginary grape.

He said these were tedious people to talk with.

He said that men who had been cured by the other process

were easily distinguished from the rest of mankind

because they always tilted their heads back, between every

two words, and swallowed a swig of imaginary whey.

He said it was an impressive thing to observe two men,

who had been cured by the two processes, engaged in

conversation--said their pauses and accompanying movements

were so continuous and regular that a stranger would think

himself in the presence of a couple of automatic machines.

One finds out a great many wonderful things, by traveling,

if he stumbles upon the right person.



I did not remain long at the Kursaal; the music was

good enough, but it seemed rather tame after the cyclone

of that Arkansaw expert.  Besides, my adventurous spirit

had conceived a formidable enterprise--nothing less

than a trip from Interlaken, by the Gemmi and Visp,

clear to Zermatt, on foot! So it was necessary to plan

the details, and get ready for an early start.  The courier

(this was not the one I have just been speaking of)

thought that the portier of the hotel would be able

to tell us how to find our way.  And so it turned out.

He showed us the whole thing, on a relief-map, and we could

see our route, with all its elevations and depressions,

its villages and its rivers, as clearly as if we were sailing

over it in a balloon.  A relief-map is a great thing.

The portier also wrote down each day's journey and the

nightly hotel on a piece of paper, and made our course

so plain that we should never be able to get lost without

high-priced outside help.



I put the courier in the care of a gentleman who was

going to Lausanne, and then we went to bed, after laying

out the walking-costumes and putting them into condition

for instant occupation in the morning.



However, when we came down to breakfast at 8 A.M., it

looked so much like rain that I hired a two-horse top-buggy

for the first third of the journey.  For two or three hours

we jogged along the level road which skirts the beautiful

lake of Thun, with a dim and dreamlike picture of watery

expanses and spectral Alpine forms always before us,

veiled in a mellowing mist.  Then a steady downpour

set in, and hid everything but the nearest objects.

We kept the rain out of our faces with umbrellas, and away

from our bodies with the leather apron of the buggy;

but the driver sat unsheltered and placidly soaked the weather

in and seemed to like it.  We had the road to ourselves,

and I never had a pleasanter excursion.



The weather began to clear while we were driving up

a valley called the Kienthal, and presently a vast black

cloud-bank in front of us dissolved away and uncurtained

the grand proportions and the soaring loftiness of the

Blumis Alp.  It was a sort of breath-taking surprise;

for we had not supposed there was anything behind

that low-hung blanket of sable cloud but level valley.

What we had been mistaking for fleeting glimpses of sky

away aloft there, were really patches of the Blumis's

snowy crest caught through shredded rents in the drifting

pall of vapor.



We dined in the inn at Frutigen, and our driver ought

to have dined there, too, but he would not have had

time to dine and get drunk both, so he gave his mind

to making a masterpiece of the latter, and succeeded.

A German gentleman and his two young-lady daughters had

been taking their nooning at the inn, and when they left,

just ahead of us, it was plain that their driver was

as drunk as ours, and as happy and good-natured, too,

which was saying a good deal.  These rascals overflowed

with attentions and information for their guests, and with

brotherly love for each other.  They tied their reins,

and took off their coats and hats, so that they might

be able to give unencumbered attention to conversation

and to the gestures necessary for its illustration.



The road was smooth; it led up and over and down a continual

succession of hills; but it was narrow, the horses were

used to it, and could not well get out of it anyhow;

so why shouldn't the drivers entertain themselves and us?

The noses of our horses projected sociably into the rear

of the forward carriage, and as we toiled up the long

hills our driver stood up and talked to his friend,

and his friend stood up and talked back to him, with his

rear to the scenery.  When the top was reached and we

went flying down the other side, there was no change in

the program.  I carry in my memory yet the picture of that

forward driver, on his knees on his high seat, resting his

elbows on its back, and beaming down on his passengers,

with happy eye, and flying hair, and jolly red face,

and offering his card to the old German gentleman while he

praised his hack and horses, and both teams were whizzing

down a long hill with nobody in a position to tell whether

we were bound to destruction or an undeserved safety.



Toward sunset we entered a beautiful green valley dotted

with chalets, a cozy little domain hidden away from the busy

world in a cloistered nook among giant precipices topped

with snowy peaks that seemed to float like islands above

the curling surf of the sea of vapor that severed them from

the lower world.  Down from vague and vaporous heights,

little ruffled zigzag milky currents came crawling,

and found their way to the verge of one of those tremendous

overhanging walls, whence they plunged, a shaft of silver,

shivered to atoms in mid-descent and turned to an air puff

of luminous dust.  Here and there, in grooved depressions

among the snowy desolations of the upper altitudes,

one glimpsed the extremity of a glacier, with its sea-green

and honeycombed battlements of ice.



Up the valley, under a dizzy precipice, nestled the

village of Kandersteg, our halting-place for the night.

We were soon there, and housed in the hotel.  But the waning

day had such an inviting influence that we did not remain

housed many moments, but struck out and followed a roaring

torrent of ice-water up to its far source in a sort of

little grass-carpeted parlor, walled in all around by vast

precipices and overlooked by clustering summits of ice.

This was the snuggest little croquet-ground imaginable;

it was perfectly level, and not more than a mile long

by half a mile wide.  The walls around it were so gigantic,

and everything about it was on so mighty a scale that it

was belittled, by contrast, to what I have likened it

to--a cozy and carpeted parlor.  It was so high above

the Kandersteg valley that there was nothing between it

and the snowy-peaks. I had never been in such intimate

relations with the high altitudes before; the snow-peaks

had always been remote and unapproachable grandeurs,

hitherto, but now we were hob-a-nob--if one may use

such a seemingly irreverent expression about creations

so august as these.



We could see the streams which fed the torrent we

had followed issuing from under the greenish ramparts

of glaciers; but two or three of these, instead of flowing

over the precipices, sank down into the rock and sprang

in big jets out of holes in the mid-face of the walls.



The green nook which I have been describing is called

the Gasternthal.  The glacier streams gather and flow through

it in a broad and rushing brook to a narrow cleft between

lofty precipices; here the rushing brook becomes a mad torrent

and goes booming and thundering down toward Kandersteg,

lashing and thrashing its way over and among monster boulders,

and hurling chance roots and logs about like straws.

There was no lack of cascades along this route.

The path by the side of the torrent was so narrow

that one had to look sharp, when he heard a cow-bell,

and hunt for a place that was wide enough to accommodate

a cow and a Christian side by side, and such places were

not always to be had at an instant's notice.  The cows

wear church-bells, and that is a good idea in the cows,

for where that torrent is, you couldn't hear an ordinary

cow-bell any further than you could hear the ticking of a watch.



I needed exercise, so I employed my agent in setting

stranded logs and dead trees adrift, and I sat on a

boulder and watched them go whirling and leaping head

over heels down the boiling torrent.  It was a wonderfully

exhilarating spectacle.  When I had had enough exercise,

I made the agent take some, by running a race with one

of those logs.  I made a trifle by betting on the log.



After dinner we had a walk up and down the Kandersteg valley,

in the soft gloaming, with the spectacle of the dying lights

of day playing about the crests and pinnacles of the still

and solemn upper realm for contrast, and text for talk.

There were no sounds but the dulled complaining of the

torrent and the occasional tinkling of a distant bell.

The spirit of the place was a sense of deep, pervading peace;

one might dream his life tranquilly away there, and not miss

it or mind it when it was gone.



The summer departed with the sun, and winter came with

the stars.  It grew to be a bitter night in that little hotel,

backed up against a precipice that had no visible top to it,

but we kept warm, and woke in time in the morning to find

that everybody else had left for Gemmi three hours before

--so our little plan of helping that German family (principally

the old man) over the pass, was a blocked generosity.







CHAPTER XXXIV

[The World's Highest Pig Farm]



We hired the only guide left, to lead us on our way.

He was over seventy, but he could have given me nine-tenths

of his strength and still had all his age entitled him to.

He shouldered our satchels, overcoats, and alpenstocks,

and we set out up the steep path.  It was hot work.

The old man soon begged us to hand over our coats

and waistcoats to him to carry, too, and we did it;

one could not refuse so little a thing to a poor old man

like that; he should have had them if he had been a hundred

and fifty.



When we began that ascent, we could see a microscopic

chalet perched away up against heaven on what seemed

to be the highest mountain near us.  It was on our right,

across the narrow head of the valley.  But when we got

up abreast it on its own level, mountains were towering

high above on every hand, and we saw that its altitude

was just about that of the little Gasternthal which we had

visited the evening before.  Still it seemed a long way up

in the air, in that waste and lonely wilderness of rocks.

It had an unfenced grass-plot in front of it which seemed

about as big as a billiard-table, and this grass-plot

slanted so sharply downward, and was so brief, and ended

so exceedingly soon at the verge of the absolute precipice,

that it was a shuddery thing to think of a person's venturing

to trust his foot on an incline so situated at all.

Suppose a man stepped on an orange peel in that yard;

there would be nothing for him to seize; nothing could

keep him from rolling; five revolutions would bring him

to the edge, and over he would go.  What a frightful distance

he would fall!--for there are very few birds that fly

as high as his starting-point. He would strike and bounce,

two or three times, on his way down, but this would be

no advantage to him.  I would as soon taking an airing

on the slant of a rainbow as in such a front yard.

I would rather, in fact, for the distance down would be about

the same, and it is pleasanter to slide than to bounce.

I could not see how the peasants got up to that chalet

--the region seemed too steep for anything but a balloon.



As we strolled on, climbing up higher and higher, we were

continually bringing neighboring peaks into view and lofty

prominence which had been hidden behind lower peaks before;

so by and by, while standing before a group of these giants,

we looked around for the chalet again; there it was,

away down below us, apparently on an inconspicuous ridge

in the valley! It was as far below us, now, as it had been

above us when we were beginning the ascent.



After a while the path led us along a railed precipice,

and we looked over--far beneath us was the snug parlor again,

the little Gasternthal, with its water jets spouting

from the face of its rock walls.  We could have dropped

a stone into it.  We had been finding the top of the world

all along--and always finding a still higher top stealing

into view in a disappointing way just ahead; when we looked

down into the Gasternthal we felt pretty sure that we

had reached the genuine top at last, but it was not so;

there were much higher altitudes to be scaled yet.

We were still in the pleasant shade of forest trees,

we were still in a region which was cushioned with beautiful

mosses and aglow with the many-tinted luster of innumerable

wild flowers.



We found, indeed, more interest in the wild flowers

than in anything else.  We gathered a specimen or two

of every kind which we were unacquainted with; so we

had sumptuous bouquets.  But one of the chief interests

lay in chasing the seasons of the year up the mountain,

and determining them by the presence of flowers and

berries which we were acquainted with.  For instance,

it was the end of August at the level of the sea;

in the Kandersteg valley at the base of the pass,

we found flowers which would not be due at the sea-level

for two or three weeks; higher up, we entered October,

and gathered fringed gentians.  I made no notes, and have

forgotten the details, but the construction of the floral

calendar was very entertaining while it lasted.



In the high regions we found rich store of the splendid

red flower called the Alpine rose, but we did not find

any examples of the ugly Swiss favorite called Edelweiss.

Its name seems to indicate that it is a noble flower

and that it is white.  It may be noble enough,

but it is not attractive, and it is not white.

The fuzzy blossom is the color of bad cigar ashes,

and appears to be made of a cheap quality of gray plush.

It has a noble and distant way of confining itself to the

high altitudes, but that is probably on account of its looks;

it apparently has no monopoly of those upper altitudes,

however, for they are sometimes intruded upon by some

of the loveliest of the valley families of wild flowers.

Everybody in the Alps wears a sprig of Edelweiss in his hat.

It is the native's pet, and also the tourist's.



All the morning, as we loafed along, having a good time,

other pedestrians went staving by us with vigorous strides,

and with the intent and determined look of men who were

walking for a wager.  These wore loose knee-breeches, long

yarn stockings, and hobnailed high-laced walking-shoes.

They were gentlemen who would go home to England or Germany

and tell how many miles they had beaten the guide-book

every day.  But I doubted if they ever had much real fun,

outside of the mere magnificent exhilaration of the

tramp through the green valleys and the breezy heights;

for they were almost always alone, and even the finest

scenery loses incalculably when there is no one to enjoy

it with.



All the morning an endless double procession of mule-mounted

tourists filed past us along the narrow path--the one

procession going, the other coming.  We had taken

a good deal of trouble to teach ourselves the kindly

German custom of saluting all strangers with doffed hat,

and we resolutely clung to it, that morning, although it

kept us bareheaded most of the time and was not always

responded to.  Still we found an interest in the thing,

because we naturally liked to know who were English

and Americans among the passers-by. All continental

natives responded of course; so did some of the English

and Americans, but, as a general thing, these two races

gave no sign.  Whenever a man or a woman showed us

cold neglect, we spoke up confidently in our own tongue

and asked for such information as we happened to need,

and we always got a reply in the same language.

The English and American folk are not less kindly than

other races, they are only more reserved, and that comes

of habit and education.  In one dreary, rocky waste,

away above the line of vegetation, we met a procession

of twenty-five mounted young men, all from America.

We got answering bows enough from these, of course,

for they were of an age to learn to do in Rome as Rome does,

without much effort.



At one extremity of this patch of desolation, overhung by bare

and forbidding crags which husbanded drifts of everlasting

snow in their shaded cavities, was a small stretch

of thin and discouraged grass, and a man and a family

of pigs were actually living here in some shanties.

Consequently this place could be really reckoned as

"property"; it had a money value, and was doubtless taxed.

I think it must have marked the limit of real estate

in this world.  It would be hard to set a money value

upon any piece of earth that lies between that spot

and the empty realm of space.  That man may claim the

distinction of owning the end of the world, for if there

is any definite end to the world he has certainly found it.



From here forward we moved through a storm-swept

and smileless desolation.  All about us rose gigantic

masses, crags, and ramparts of bare and dreary rock,

with not a vestige or semblance of plant or tree or

flower anywhere, or glimpse of any creature that had life.

The frost and the tempests of unnumbered ages had battered

and hacked at these cliffs, with a deathless energy,

destroying them piecemeal; so all the region about

their bases was a tumbled chaos of great fragments

which had been split off and hurled to the ground.

Soiled and aged banks of snow lay close about our path.

The ghastly desolation of the place was as tremendously

complete as if Dor'e had furnished the working-plans

for it.  But every now and then, through the stern

gateways around us we caught a view of some neighboring

majestic dome, sheathed with glittering ice, and displaying

its white purity at an elevation compared to which

ours was groveling and plebeian, and this spectacle

always chained one's interest and admiration at once,

and made him forget there was anything ugly in the world.



I have just said that there was nothing but death

and desolation in these hideous places, but I forgot.

In the most forlorn and arid and dismal one of all,

where the racked and splintered debris was thickest,

where the ancient patches of snow lay against the very path,

where the winds blew bitterest and the general aspect was

mournfulest and dreariest, and furthest from any suggestion

of cheer or hope, I found a solitary wee forget-me-not

flourishing away, not a droop about it anywhere,

but holding its bright blue star up with the prettiest

and gallantest air in the world, the only happy spirit,

the only smiling thing, in all that grisly desert.

She seemed to say, "Cheer up!--as long as we are here,

let us make the best of it." I judged she had earned

a right to a more hospitable place; so I plucked her up

and sent her to America to a friend who would respect

her for the fight she had made, all by her small self,

to make a whole vast despondent Alpine desolation stop

breaking its heart over the unalterable, and hold up its

head and look at the bright side of things for once.



We stopped for a nooning at a strongly built little inn

called the Schwarenbach.  It sits in a lonely spot among

the peaks, where it is swept by the trailing fringes

of the cloud-rack, and is rained on, and snowed on,

and pelted and persecuted by the storms, nearly every day

of its life.  It was the only habitation in the whole

Gemmi Pass.



Close at hand, now, was a chance for a blood-curdling

Alpine adventure.  Close at hand was the snowy mass

of the Great Altels cooling its topknot in the sky

and daring us to an ascent.  I was fired with the idea,

and immediately made up my mind to procure the necessary

guides, ropes, etc., and undertake it.  I instructed

Harris to go to the landlord of the inn and set him

about our preparations.  Meantime, I went diligently

to work to read up and find out what this much-talked-of

mountain-climbing was like, and how one should go about

it--for in these matters I was ignorant.  I opened

Mr. Hinchliff's SUMMER MONTHS AMONG THE ALPS (published

1857), and selected his account of his ascent of Monte Rosa.



It began:



    "It is very difficult to free the mind from excitement

    on the evening before a grand expedition--"



I saw that I was too calm; so I walked the room a while

and worked myself into a high excitement; but the book's

next remark --that the adventurer must get up at two

in the morning--came as near as anything to flatting it

all out again.  However, I reinforced it, and read on,

about how Mr. Hinchliff dressed by candle-light and was "soon

down among the guides, who were bustling about in the passage,

packing provisions, and making every preparation for the start";

and how he glanced out into the cold clear night and saw that--



"The whole sky was blazing with stars, larger and brighter

than they appear through the dense atmosphere breathed

by inhabitants of the lower parts of the earth.

They seemed actually suspended from the dark vault

of heaven, and their gentle light shed a fairylike gleam

over the snow-fields around the foot of the Matterhorn,

which raised its stupendous pinnacle on high, penetrating to

the heart of the Great Bear, and crowning itself with a

diadem of his magnificent stars.  Not a sound disturbed

the deep tranquillity of the night, except the distant

roar of streams which rush from the high plateau of the

St. Theodule glacier, and fall headlong over precipitous

rocks till they lose themselves in the mazes of

the Gorner glacier."



He took his hot toast and coffee, and then about

half past three his caravan of ten men filed away

from the Riffel Hotel, and began the steep climb.

At half past five he happened to turn around, and "beheld

the glorious spectacle of the Matterhorn, just touched

by the rosy-fingered morning, and looking like a huge

pyramid of fire rising out of the barren ocean of ice

and rock around it." Then the Breithorn and the Dent

Blanche caught the radiant glow; but "the intervening

mass of Monte Rosa made it necessary for us to climb many

long hours before we could hope to see the sun himself,

yet the whole air soon grew warmer after the splendid

birth of the day."



He gazed at the lofty crown of Monte Rosa and the wastes

of snow that guarded its steep approaches, and the chief

guide delivered the opinion that no man could conquer

their awful heights and put his foot upon that summit.

But the adventurers moved steadily on, nevertheless.



They toiled up, and up, and still up; they passed

the Grand Plateau; then toiled up a steep shoulder

of the mountain, clinging like flies to its rugged face;

and now they were confronted by a tremendous wall from

which great blocks of ice and snow were evidently in the

habit of falling.  They turned aside to skirt this wall,

and gradually ascended until their way was barred by a "maze

of gigantic snow crevices,"--so they turned aside again,

and "began a long climb of sufficient steepness to make

a zigzag course necessary."



Fatigue compelled them to halt frequently, for a moment

or two.  At one of these halts somebody called out,

"Look at Mont Blanc!" and "we were at once made aware

of the very great height we had attained by actually seeing

the monarch of the Alps and his attendant satellites

right over the top of the Breithorn, itself at least

14,000 feet high!"



These people moved in single file, and were all tied

to a strong rope, at regular distances apart, so that if

one of them slipped on those giddy heights, the others

could brace themselves on their alpenstocks and save him

from darting into the valley, thousands of feet below.

By and by they came to an ice-coated ridge which was tilted

up at a sharp angle, and had a precipice on one side of it.

They had to climb this, so the guide in the lead cut

steps in the ice with his hatchet, and as fast as he

took his toes out of one of these slight holes, the toes

of the man behind him occupied it.



"Slowly and steadily we kept on our way over this dangerous

part of the ascent, and I dare say it was fortunate for

some of us that attention was distracted from the head

by the paramount necessity of looking after the feet;

FOR, WHILE ON THE LEFT THE INCLINE OF ICE WAS SO STEEP

THAT IT WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE FOR ANY MAN TO SAVE HIMSELF

IN CASE OF A SLIP, UNLESS THE OTHERS COULD HOLD HIM UP,

ON THE RIGHT WE MIGHT DROP A PEBBLE FROM THE HAND OVER

PRECIPICES OF UNKNOWN EXTENT DOWN UPON THE TREMENDOUS

GLACIER BELOW.



"Great caution, therefore, was absolutely necessary,

and in this exposed situation we were attacked by all

the fury of that grand enemy of aspirants to Monte

Rosa--a severe and bitterly cold wind from the north.

The fine powdery snow was driven past us in the clouds,

penetrating the interstices of our clothes, and the pieces

of ice which flew from the blows of Peter's ax were

whisked into the air, and then dashed over the precipice.

We had quite enough to do to prevent ourselves from being

served in the same ruthless fashion, and now and then,

in the more violent gusts of wind, were glad to stick our

alpenstocks into the ice and hold on hard."



Having surmounted this perilous steep, they sat down and

took a brief rest with their backs against a sheltering

rock and their heels dangling over a bottomless abyss;

then they climbed to the base of another ridge--a more

difficult and dangerous one still:



"The whole of the ridge was exceedingly narrow, and the

fall on each side desperately steep, but the ice in some

of these intervals between the masses of rock assumed

the form of a mere sharp edge, almost like a knife;

these places, though not more than three or four short

paces in length, looked uncommonly awkward; but, like the

sword leading true believers to the gates of Paradise,

they must needs be passed before we could attain to

the summit of our ambition.  These were in one or two

places so narrow, that in stepping over them with toes

well turned out for greater security, ONE END OF THE

FOOT PROJECTED OVER THE AWFUL PRECIPICE ON THE RIGHT,

WHILE THE OTHER WAS ON THE BEGINNING OF THE ICE SLOPE ON

THE LEFT, WHICH WAS SCARCELY LESS STEEP THAN THE ROCKS.

On these occasions Peter would take my hand, and each

of us stretching as far as we could, he was thus enabled

to get a firm footing two paces or rather more from me,

whence a spring would probably bring him to the rock

on the other side; then, turning around, he called

to me to come, and, taking a couple of steps carefully,

I was met at the third by his outstretched hand ready

to clasp mine, and in a moment stood by his side.

The others followed in much the same fashion.  Once my

right foot slipped on the side toward the precipice,

but I threw out my left arm in a moment so that it caught

the icy edge under my armpit as I fell, and supported

me considerably; at the same instant I cast my eyes

down the side on which I had slipped, and contrived

to plant my right foot on a piece of rock as large as a

cricket-ball, which chanced to protrude through the ice,

on the very edge of the precipice.  Being thus anchored

fore and aft, as it were, I believe I could easily have

recovered myself, even if I had been alone, though it must

be confessed the situation would have been an awful one;

as it was, however, a jerk from Peter settled the matter

very soon, and I was on my legs all right in an instant.

The rope is an immense help in places of this kind."



Now they arrived at the base of a great knob or dome

veneered with ice and powdered with snow--the utmost,

summit, the last bit of solidity between them and the hollow

vault of heaven.  They set to work with their hatchets,

and were soon creeping, insectlike, up its surface, with their

heels projecting over the thinnest kind of nothingness,

thickened up a little with a few wandering shreds and

films of cloud moving in a lazy procession far below.

Presently, one man's toe-hold broke and he fell! There he

dangled in mid-air at the end of the rope, like a spider,

till his friends above hauled him into place again.



A little bit later, the party stood upon the wee pedestal

of the very summit, in a driving wind, and looked out

upon the vast green expanses of Italy and a shoreless

ocean of billowy Alps.



When I had read thus far, Harris broke into the room

in a noble excitement and said the ropes and the guides

were secured, and asked if I was ready.  I said I

believed I wouldn't ascend the Altels this time.

I said Alp-climbing was a different thing from what I had

supposed it was, and so I judged we had better study its

points a little more before we went definitely into it.

But I told him to retain the guides and order them to

follow us to Zermatt, because I meant to use them there.

I said I could feel the spirit of adventure beginning

to stir in me, and was sure that the fell fascination

of Alp-climbing would soon be upon me.  I said he could

make up his mind to it that we would do a deed before we

were a week older which would make the hair of the timid

curl with fright.



This made Harris happy, and filled him with ambitious

anticipations.  He went at once to tell the guides to

follow us to Zermatt and bring all their paraphernalia

with them.







CHAPTER XXXV

[Swindling the Coroner]



A great and priceless thing is a new interest! How

it takes possession of a man! how it clings to him,

how it rides him! I strode onward from the Schwarenbach

hostelry a changed man, a reorganized personality.

I walked into a new world, I saw with new eyes.

I had been looking aloft at the giant show-peaks only as

things to be worshiped for their grandeur and magnitude,

and their unspeakable grace of form; I looked up at

them now, as also things to be conquered and climbed.

My sense of their grandeur and their noble beauty

was neither lost nor impaired; I had gained a new

interest in the mountains without losing the old ones.

I followed the steep lines up, inch by inch, with my eye,

and noted the possibility or impossibility of following

them with my feet.  When I saw a shining helmet of ice

projecting above the clouds, I tried to imagine I saw

files of black specks toiling up it roped together with a

gossamer thread.



We skirted the lonely little lake called the Daubensee,

and presently passed close by a glacier on the right

--a thing like a great river frozen solid in its flow

and broken square off like a wall at its mouth.

I had never been so near a glacier before.



Here we came upon a new board shanty, and found some men

engaged in building a stone house; so the Schwarenbach was

soon to have a rival.  We bought a bottle or so of beer here;

at any rate they called it beer, but I knew by the price

that it was dissolved jewelry, and I perceived by the

taste that dissolved jewelry is not good stuff to drink.



We were surrounded by a hideous desolation.  We stepped

forward to a sort of jumping-off place, and were confronted

by a startling contrast: we seemed to look down into fairyland.

Two or three thousand feet below us was a bright green level,

with a pretty town in its midst, and a silvery stream

winding among the meadows; the charming spot was walled

in on all sides by gigantic precipices clothed with pines;

and over the pines, out of the softened distances,

rose the snowy domes and peaks of the Monte Rosa region.

How exquisitely green and beautiful that little valley

down there was! The distance was not great enough to

obliterate details, it only made them little, and mellow,

and dainty, like landscapes and towns seen through the

wrong end of a spy-glass.



Right under us a narrow ledge rose up out of the valley,

with a green, slanting, bench-shaped top, and grouped

about upon this green-baize bench were a lot of black

and white sheep which looked merely like oversized worms.

The bench seemed lifted well up into our neighborhood,

but that was a deception--it was a long way down to it.



We began our descent, now, by the most remarkable road I

have ever seen.  It wound its corkscrew curves down the face

of the colossal precipice--a narrow way, with always

the solid rock wall at one elbow, and perpendicular

nothingness at the other.  We met an everlasting procession

of guides, porters, mules, litters, and tourists climbing

up this steep and muddy path, and there was no room

to spare when you had to pass a tolerably fat mule.

I always took the inside, when I heard or saw the

mule coming, and flattened myself against the wall.

I preferred the inside, of course, but I should have had

to take it anyhow, because the mule prefers the outside.

A mule's preference--on a precipice--is a thing to

be respected.  Well, his choice is always the outside.

His life is mostly devoted to carrying bulky panniers

and packages which rest against his body--therefore he

is habituated to taking the outside edge of mountain paths,

to keep his bundles from rubbing against rocks or banks

on the other.  When he goes into the passenger business he

absurdly clings to his old habit, and keeps one leg of his

passenger always dangling over the great deeps of the lower

world while that passenger's heart is in the highlands,

so to speak.  More than once I saw a mule's hind foot

cave over the outer edge and send earth and rubbish into

the bottom abyss; and I noticed that upon these occasions

the rider, whether male or female, looked tolerably unwell.



There was one place where an eighteen-inch breadth of

light masonry had been added to the verge of the path,

and as there was a very sharp turn here, a panel of fencing

had been set up there at some time, as a protection.

This panel was old and gray and feeble, and the light

masonry had been loosened by recent rains.  A young

American girl came along on a mule, and in making the turn

the mule's hind foot caved all the loose masonry and one

of the fence-posts overboard; the mule gave a violent lurch

inboard to save himself, and succeeded in the effort,

but that girl turned as white as the snows of Mont Blanc

for a moment.



The path was simply a groove cut into the face of

the precipice; there was a four-foot breadth of solid rock

under the traveler, and four-foot breadth of solid rock

just above his head, like the roof of a narrow porch;

he could look out from this gallery and see a sheer

summitless and bottomless wall of rock before him,

across a gorge or crack a biscuit's toss in width

--but he could not see the bottom of his own precipice

unless he lay down and projected his nose over the edge.

I did not do this, because I did not wish to soil my clothes.



Every few hundred yards, at particularly bad places,

one came across a panel or so of plank fencing; but they

were always old and weak, and they generally leaned

out over the chasm and did not make any rash promises

to hold up people who might need support.  There was one

of these panels which had only its upper board left;

a pedestrianizing English youth came tearing down the path,

was seized with an impulse to look over the precipice,

and without an instant's thought he threw his weight

upon that crazy board.  It bent outward a foot! I never

made a gasp before that came so near suffocating me.

The English youth's face simply showed a lively surprise,

but nothing more.  He went swinging along valleyward again,

as if he did not know he had just swindled a coroner by the

closest kind of a shave.



The Alpine litter is sometimes like a cushioned box

made fast between the middles of two long poles,

and sometimes it is a chair with a back to it and a support

for the feet.  It is carried by relays of strong porters.

The motion is easier than that of any other conveyance.

We met a few men and a great many ladies in litters;

it seemed to me that most of the ladies looked pale

and nauseated; their general aspect gave me the idea

that they were patiently enduring a horrible suffering.

As a rule, they looked at their laps, and left the scenery

to take care of itself.



But the most frightened creature I saw, was a led horse

that overtook us.  Poor fellow, he had been born and reared

in the grassy levels of the Kandersteg valley and had

never seen anything like this hideous place before.

Every few steps he would stop short, glance wildly out from

the dizzy height, and then spread his red nostrils wide

and pant as violently as if he had been running a race;

and all the while he quaked from head to heel as with

a palsy.  He was a handsome fellow, and he made a fine

statuesque picture of terror, but it was pitiful to see

him suffer so.



This dreadful path has had its tragedy.  Baedeker, with his

customary over-terseness, begins and ends the tale thus:



"The descent on horseback should be avoided.

In 1861 a Comtesse d'Herlincourt fell from her saddle

over the precipice and was killed on the spot."



We looked over the precipice there, and saw the monument

which commemorates the event.  It stands in the bottom

of the gorge, in a place which has been hollowed out of

the rock to protect it from the torrent and the storms.

Our old guide never spoke but when spoken to, and then

limited himself to a syllable or two, but when we asked

him about this tragedy he showed a strong interest

in the matter.  He said the Countess was very pretty,

and very young--hardly out of her girlhood, in fact.

She was newly married, and was on her bridal tour.

The young husband was riding a little in advance; one guide

was leading the husband's horse, another was leading the

bride's.



The old man continued:



"The guide that was leading the husband's horse happened

to glance back, and there was that poor young thing sitting

up staring out over the precipice; and her face began

to bend downward a little, and she put up her two hands

slowly and met it--so,--and put them flat against her

eyes--so--and then she sank out of the saddle, with a

sharp shriek, and one caught only the flash of a dress,

and it was all over."



Then after a pause:



"Ah, yes, that guide saw these things--yes, he saw them all.

He saw them all, just as I have told you."



After another pause:



"Ah, yes, he saw them all.  My God, that was ME.

I was that guide!"



This had been the one event of the old man's life; so one

may be sure he had forgotten no detail connected with it.

We listened to all he had to say about what was done and what

happened and what was said after the sorrowful occurrence,

and a painful story it was.



When we had wound down toward the valley until we were about

on the last spiral of the corkscrew, Harris's hat blew

over the last remaining bit of precipice--a small cliff

a hundred or hundred and fifty feet high--and sailed down

toward a steep slant composed of rough chips and fragments

which the weather had flaked away from the precipices.

We went leisurely down there, expecting to find it without

any trouble, but we had made a mistake, as to that.

We hunted during a couple of hours--not because the old

straw hat was valuable, but out of curiosity to find out

how such a thing could manage to conceal itself in open

ground where there was nothing left for it to hide behind.

When one is reading in bed, and lays his paper-knife down,

he cannot find it again if it is smaller than a saber;

that hat was as stubborn as any paper-knife could have been,

and we finally had to give it up; but we found a fragment

that had once belonged to an opera-glass, and by digging

around and turning over the rocks we gradually collected

all the lenses and the cylinders and the various odds

and ends that go to making up a complete opera-glass.

We afterward had the thing reconstructed, and the owner

can have his adventurous lost-property by submitting

proofs and paying costs of rehabilitation.  We had hopes

of finding the owner there, distributed around amongst

the rocks, for it would have made an elegant paragraph;

but we were disappointed.  Still, we were far from

being disheartened, for there was a considerable area

which we had not thoroughly searched; we were satisfied he

was there, somewhere, so we resolved to wait over a day at

Leuk and come back and get him.



Then we sat down to polish off the perspiration and

arrange about what we would do with him when we got him.

Harris was for contributing him to the British Museum;

but I was for mailing him to his widow.  That is the difference

between Harris and me: Harris is all for display, I am

all for the simple right, even though I lose money by it.

Harris argued in favor of his proposition against mine,

I argued in favor of mine and against his.  The discussion

warmed into a dispute; the dispute warmed into a quarrel.

I finally said, very decidedly:



"My mind is made up.  He goes to the widow."



Harris answered sharply:



"And MY mind is made up.  He goes to the Museum."



I said, calmly:



"The museum may whistle when it gets him."



Harris retorted:



"The widow may save herself the trouble of whistling,

for I will see that she never gets him."



After some angry bandying of epithets, I said:



"It seems to me that you are taking on a good many airs

about these remains.  I don't quite see what YOU'VE got

to say about them?"



"I? I've got ALL to say about them.  They'd never have

been thought of if I hadn't found their opera-glass. The

corpse belongs to me, and I'll do as I please with him."



I was leader of the Expedition, and all discoveries

achieved by it naturally belonged to me.  I was entitled

to these remains, and could have enforced my right;

but rather than have bad blood about the matter,

I said we would toss up for them.  I threw heads and won,

but it was a barren victory, for although we spent all

the next day searching, we never found a bone.  I cannot

imagine what could ever have become of that fellow.



The town in the valley is called Leuk or Leukerbad.

We pointed our course toward it, down a verdant slope

which was adorned with fringed gentians and other flowers,

and presently entered the narrow alleys of the outskirts

and waded toward the middle of the town through liquid

"fertilizer." They ought to either pave that village or

organize a ferry.



Harris's body was simply a chamois-pasture; his person

was populous with the little hungry pests; his skin,

when he stripped, was splotched like a scarlet-fever patient's;

so, when we were about to enter one of the Leukerbad inns,

and he noticed its sign, "Chamois Hotel," he refused

to stop there.  He said the chamois was plentiful enough,

without hunting up hotels where they made a specialty of it.

I was indifferent, for the chamois is a creature that will

neither bite me nor abide with me; but to calm Harris,

we went to the Ho^tel des Alpes.



At the table d'ho^te, we had this, for an incident.

A very grave man--in fact his gravity amounted to solemnity,

and almost to austerity--sat opposite us and he was

"tight," but doing his best to appear sober.  He took up

a CORKED bottle of wine, tilted it over his glass awhile,

then set it out of the way, with a contented look, and went

on with his dinner.



Presently he put his glass to his mouth, and of course

found it empty.  He looked puzzled, and glanced furtively

and suspiciously out of the corner of his eye at a

benignant and unconscious old lady who sat at his right.

Shook his head, as much as to say, "No, she couldn't have

done it." He tilted the corked bottle over his glass again,

meantime searching around with his watery eye to see

if anybody was watching him.  He ate a few mouthfuls,

raised his glass to his lips, and of course it was

still empty.  He bent an injured and accusing side-glance

upon that unconscious old lady, which was a study to see.

She went on eating and gave no sign.  He took up his glass

and his bottle, with a wise private nod of his head,

and set them gravely on the left-hand side of his plate

--poured himself another imaginary drink--went to work

with his knife and fork once more--presently lifted

his glass with good confidence, and found it empty,

as usual.



This was almost a petrifying surprise.  He straightened

himself up in his chair and deliberately and sorrowfully

inspected the busy old ladies at his elbows, first one and

then the other.  At last he softly pushed his plate away,

set his glass directly in front of him, held on to it

with his left hand, and proceeded to pour with his right.

This time he observed that nothing came.  He turned the

bottle clear upside down; still nothing issued from it;

a plaintive look came into his face, and he said, as if

to himself,



"'IC! THEY'VE GOT IT ALL!" Then he set the bottle down,

resignedly, and took the rest of his dinner dry.



It was at that table d'ho^te, too, that I had under inspection

the largest lady I have ever seen in private life.

She was over seven feet high, and magnificently proportioned.

What had first called my attention to her, was my stepping

on an outlying flange of her foot, and hearing, from up

toward the ceiling, a deep "Pardon, m'sieu, but you encroach!"



That was when we were coming through the hall, and the place

was dim, and I could see her only vaguely.  The thing

which called my attention to her the second time was,

that at a table beyond ours were two very pretty girls,

and this great lady came in and sat down between them

and me and blotted out my view.  She had a handsome face,

and she was very finely formed--perfected formed,

I should say.  But she made everybody around her look trivial

and commonplace.  Ladies near her looked like children,

and the men about her looked mean.  They looked like failures;

and they looked as if they felt so, too.  She sat with

her back to us.  I never saw such a back in my life.

I would have so liked to see the moon rise over it.

The whole congregation waited, under one pretext or another,

till she finished her dinner and went out; they wanted to see

her at full altitude, and they found it worth tarrying for.

She filled one's idea of what an empress ought to be,

when she rose up in her unapproachable grandeur and moved

superbly out of that place.



We were not at Leuk in time to see her at her heaviest weight.

She had suffered from corpulence and had come there to get

rid of her extra flesh in the baths.  Five weeks of soaking

--five uninterrupted hours of it every day--had accomplished

her purpose and reduced her to the right proportions.



Those baths remove fat, and also skin-diseases. The

patients remain in the great tanks for hours at a time.

A dozen gentlemen and ladies occupy a tank together,

and amuse themselves with rompings and various games.

They have floating desks and tables, and they read or lunch

or play chess in water that is breast-deep. The tourist

can step in and view this novel spectacle if he chooses.

There's a poor-box, and he will have to contribute.

There are several of these big bathing-houses, and you can

always tell when you are near one of them by the romping

noises and shouts of laughter that proceed from it.

The water is running water, and changes all the time,

else a patient with a ringworm might take the bath with only

a partial success, since, while he was ridding himself of

the ringworm, he might catch the itch.



The next morning we wandered back up the green valley,

leisurely, with the curving walls of those bare and

stupendous precipices rising into the clouds before us.

I had never seen a clean, bare precipice stretching up

five thousand feet above me before, and I never shall

expect to see another one.  They exist, perhaps, but not

in places where one can easily get close to them.

This pile of stone is peculiar.  From its base to the

soaring tops of its mighty towers, all its lines and

all its details vaguely suggest human architecture.

There are rudimentary bow-windows, cornices, chimneys,

demarcations of stories, etc.  One could sit and stare up

there and study the features and exquisite graces of this

grand structure, bit by bit, and day after day, and never

weary his interest.  The termination, toward the town,

observed in profile, is the perfection of shape.

It comes down out of the clouds in a succession of rounded,

colossal, terracelike projections--a stairway for the gods;

at its head spring several lofty storm-scarred towers,

one after another, with faint films of vapor curling

always about them like spectral banners.  If there were

a king whose realms included the whole world, here would

be the place meet and proper for such a monarch.  He would

only need to hollow it out and put in the electric light.

He could give audience to a nation at a time under its roof.



Our search for those remains having failed, we inspected with

a glass the dim and distant track of an old-time avalanche

that once swept down from some pine-grown summits behind

the town and swept away the houses and buried the people;

then we struck down the road that leads toward the Rhone,

to see the famous Ladders.  These perilous things are

built against the perpendicular face of a cliff two or

three hundred feet high.  The peasants, of both sexes,

were climbing up and down them, with heavy loads on

their backs.  I ordered Harris to make the ascent, so I

could put the thrill and horror of it in my book, and he

accomplished the feat successfully, though a subagent,

for three francs, which I paid.  It makes me shudder yet

when I think of what I felt when I was clinging there

between heaven and earth in the person of that proxy.

At times the world swam around me, and I could hardly keep

from letting go, so dizzying was the appalling danger.

Many a person would have given up and descended, but I stuck

to my task, and would not yield until I had accomplished it.

I felt a just pride in my exploit, but I would not

have repeated it for the wealth of the world.  I shall

break my neck yet with some such foolhardy performance,

for warnings never seem to have any lasting effect on me.

When the people of the hotel found that I had been

climbing those crazy Ladders, it made me an object of

considerable attention.



Next morning, early, we drove to the Rhone valley and took

the train for Visp.  There we shouldered our knapsacks

and things, and set out on foot, in a tremendous rain,

up the winding gorge, toward Zermatt.  Hour after hour we

slopped along, by the roaring torrent, and under noble

Lesser Alps which were clothed in rich velvety green

all the way up and had little atomy Swiss homes perched

upon grassy benches along their mist-dimmed heights.



The rain continued to pour and the torrent to boom, and we

continued to enjoy both.  At the one spot where this torrent

tossed its white mane highest, and thundered loudest,

and lashed the big boulders fiercest, the canton had done

itself the honor to build the flimsiest wooden bridge

that exists in the world.  While we were walking over it,

along with a party of horsemen, I noticed that even

the larger raindrops made it shake.  I called Harris's

attention to it, and he noticed it, too.  It seemed

to me that if I owned an elephant that was a keepsake,

and I thought a good deal of him, I would think twice

before I would ride him over that bridge.



We climbed up to the village of St. Nicholas, about half

past four in the afternoon, waded ankle-deep through

the fertilizer-juice, and stopped at a new and nice hotel

close by the little church.  We stripped and went to bed,

and sent our clothes down to be baked.  And the horde

of soaked tourists did the same.  That chaos of clothing

got mixed in the kitchen, and there were consequences.

I did not get back the same drawers I sent down, when our

things came up at six-fifteen; I got a pair on a new plan.

They were merely a pair of white ruffle-cuffed absurdities,

hitched together at the top with a narrow band, and they did

not come quite down to my knees.  They were pretty enough,

but they made me feel like two people, and disconnected

at that.  The man must have been an idiot that got himself

up like that, to rough it in the Swiss mountains.

The shirt they brought me was shorter than the drawers,

and hadn't any sleeves to it--at least it hadn't anything

more than what Mr. Darwin would call "rudimentary" sleeves;

these had "edging" around them, but the bosom was

ridiculously plain.  The knit silk undershirt they brought

me was on a new plan, and was really a sensible thing;

it opened behind, and had pockets in it to put your

shoulder-blades in; but they did not seem to fit mine,

and so I found it a sort of uncomfortable garment.

They gave my bobtail coat to somebody else, and sent me

an ulster suitable for a giraffe.  I had to tie my collar on,

because there was no button behind on that foolish little shirt

which I described a while ago.



When I was dressed for dinner at six-thirty, I was too loose

in some places and too tight in others, and altogether I

felt slovenly and ill-conditioned. However, the people

at the table d'ho^te were no better off than I was;

they had everybody's clothes but their own on.  A long

stranger recognized his ulster as soon as he saw the tail

of it following me in, but nobody claimed my shirt or

my drawers, though I described them as well as I was able.

I gave them to the chambermaid that night when I went

to bed, and she probably found the owner, for my own

things were on a chair outside my door in the morning.



There was a lovable English clergyman who did

not get to the table d'ho^te at all.  His breeches

had turned up missing, and without any equivalent.

He said he was not more particular than other people,

but he had noticed that a clergyman at dinner without

any breeches was almost sure to excite remark.







CHAPTER XXXVI

[The Fiendish Fun of Alp-climbing]



We did not oversleep at St. Nicholas.  The church-bell

began to ring at four-thirty in the morning, and from

the length of time it continued to ring I judged that it

takes the Swiss sinner a good while to get the invitation

through his head.  Most church-bells in the world

are of poor quality, and have a harsh and rasping

sound which upsets the temper and produces much sin,

but the St. Nicholas bell is a good deal the worst one

that has been contrived yet, and is peculiarly maddening

in its operation.  Still, it may have its right and its

excuse to exist, for the community is poor and not every

citizen can afford a clock, perhaps; but there cannot be

any excuse for our church-bells at home, for their is no

family in America without a clock, and consequently there

is no fair pretext for the usual Sunday medley of dreadful

sounds that issues from our steeples.  There is much more

profanity in America on Sunday than is all in the other six

days of the week put together, and it is of a more bitter

and malignant character than the week-day profanity, too.

It is produced by the cracked-pot clangor of the cheap

church-bells.



We build our churches almost without regard to cost;

we rear an edifice which is an adornment to the town, and we

gild it, and fresco it, and mortgage it, and do everything

we can think of to perfect it, and then spoil it all by

putting a bell on it which afflicts everybody who hears it,

giving some the headache, others St. Vitus's dance,

and the rest the blind staggers.



An American village at ten o'clock on a summer Sunday is

the quietest and peacefulest and holiest thing in nature;

but it is a pretty different thing half an hour later.

Mr. Poe's poem of the "Bells" stands incomplete to this day;

but it is well enough that it is so, for the public reciter

or "reader" who goes around trying to imitate the sounds

of the various sorts of bells with his voice would find

himself "up a stump" when he got to the church-bell

--as Joseph Addison would say.  The church is always trying

to get other people to reform; it might not be a bad idea

to reform itself a little, by way of example.  It is still

clinging to one or two things which were useful once,

but which are not useful now, neither are they ornamental.

One is the bell-ringing to remind a clock-caked town

that it is church-time, and another is the reading from

the pulpit of a tedious list of "notices" which everybody

who is interested has already read in the newspaper.

The clergyman even reads the hymn through--a relic

of an ancient time when hymn-books are scarce and costly;

but everybody has a hymn-book, now, and so the public reading

is no longer necessary.  It is not merely unnecessary,

it is generally painful; for the average clergyman could

not fire into his congregation with a shotgun and hit a worse

reader than himself, unless the weapon scattered shamefully.

I am not meaning to be flippant and irreverent, I am only

meaning to be truthful.  The average clergyman, in all

countries and of all denominations, is a very bad reader.

One would think he would at least learn how to read

the Lord's Prayer, by and by, but it is not so.  He races

through it as if he thought the quicker he got it in,

the sooner it would be answered.  A person who does not

appreciate the exceeding value of pauses, and does not know

how to measure their duration judiciously, cannot render

the grand simplicity and dignity of a composition like

that effectively.



We took a tolerably early breakfast, and tramped off

toward Zermatt through the reeking lanes of the village,

glad to get away from that bell.  By and by we had a fine

spectacle on our right.  It was the wall-like butt end of a

huge glacier, which looked down on us from an Alpine height

which was well up in the blue sky.  It was an astonishing

amount of ice to be compacted together in one mass.

We ciphered upon it and decided that it was not less than

several hundred feet from the base of the wall of solid

ice to the top of it--Harris believed it was really

twice that.  We judged that if St. Paul's, St. Peter's,

the Great Pyramid, the Strasburg Cathedral and the Capitol

in Washington were clustered against that wall, a man

sitting on its upper edge could not hang his hat on the top

of any one of them without reaching down three or four

hundred feet--a thing which, of course, no man could do.



To me, that mighty glacier was very beautiful.  I did

not imagine that anybody could find fault with it; but I

was mistaken.  Harris had been snarling for several days.

He was a rabid Protestant, and he was always saying:



"In the Protestant cantons you never see such poverty

and dirt and squalor as you do in this Catholic one;

you never see the lanes and alleys flowing with foulness;

you never see such wretched little sties of houses;

you never see an inverted tin turnip on top of a church

for a dome; and as for a church-bell, why, you never hear

a church-bell at all."



All this morning he had been finding fault, straight along.

First it was with the mud.  He said, "It ain't muddy in a

Protestant canton when it rains." Then it was with the dogs:

"They don't have those lop-eared dogs in a Protestant canton."

Then it was with the roads: "They don't leave the roads

to make themselves in a Protestant canton, the people make

them--and they make a road that IS a road, too." Next it

was the goats: "You never see a goat shedding tears

in a Protestant canton--a goat, there, is one of the

cheerfulest objects in nature." Next it was the chamois:

"You never see a Protestant chamois act like one of these

--they take a bite or two and go; but these fellows camp

with you and stay." Then it was the guide-boards: "In

a Protestant canton you couldn't get lost if you wanted to,

but you never see a guide-board in a Catholic canton."

Next, "You never see any flower-boxes in the windows,

here--never anything but now and then a cat--a torpid one;

but you take a Protestant canton: windows perfectly lovely

with flowers--and as for cats, there's just acres of them.

These folks in this canton leave a road to make itself,

and then fine you three francs if you 'trot' over it

--as if a horse could trot over such a sarcasm of a road."

Next about the goiter: "THEY talk about goiter!--I haven't

seen a goiter in this whole canton that I couldn't put

in a hat."



He had growled at everything, but I judged it would puzzle

him to find anything the matter with this majestic glacier.

I intimated as much; but he was ready, and said with surly

discontent: "You ought to see them in the Protestant cantons."



This irritated me.  But I concealed the feeling, and asked:



"What is the matter with this one?"



"Matter? Why, it ain't in any kind of condition.

They never take any care of a glacier here.  The moraine

has been spilling gravel around it, and got it all dirty."



"Why, man, THEY can't help that."



"THEY? You're right.  That is, they WON'T. They could

if they wanted to.  You never see a speck of dirt

on a Protestant glacier.  Look at the Rhone glacier.

It is fifteen miles long, and seven hundred feet think.

If this was a Protestant glacier you wouldn't see it looking

like this, I can tell you."



"That is nonsense.  What would they do with it?"



"They would whitewash it.  They always do."



I did not believe a word of this, but rather than have

trouble I let it go; for it is a waste of breath to argue

with a bigot.  I even doubted if the Rhone glacier WAS

in a Protestant canton; but I did not know, so I could

not make anything by contradicting a man who would

probably put me down at once with manufactured evidence.



About nine miles from St. Nicholas we crossed a bridge

over the raging torrent of the Visp, and came to a log

strip of flimsy fencing which was pretending to secure

people from tumbling over a perpendicular wall forty feet

high and into the river.  Three children were approaching;

one of them, a little girl, about eight years old,

was running; when pretty close to us she stumbled and fell,

and her feet shot under the rail of the fence and for a

moment projected over the stream.  It gave us a sharp shock,

for we thought she was gone, sure, for the ground slanted

steeply, and to save herself seemed a sheer impossibility;

but she managed to scramble up, and ran by us laughing.



We went forward and examined the place and saw the long

tracks which her feet had made in the dirt when they

darted over the verge.  If she had finished her trip she

would have struck some big rocks in the edge of the water,

and then the torrent would have snatched her downstream

among the half-covered boulders and she would have been

pounded to pulp in two minutes.  We had come exceedingly

near witnessing her death.



And now Harris's contrary nature and inborn selfishness

were striking manifested.  He has no spirit of self-denial.

He began straight off, and continued for an hour,

to express his gratitude that the child was not destroyed.

I never saw such a man.  That was the kind of person he was;

just so HE was gratified, he never cared anything about

anybody else.  I had noticed that trait in him, over and

over again.  Often, of course, it was mere heedlessness,

mere want of reflection.  Doubtless this may have been

the case in most instances, but it was not the less hard

to bar on that account--and after all, its bottom,

its groundwork, was selfishness.  There is no avoiding

that conclusion.  In the instance under consideration,

I did think the indecency of running on in that way might

occur to him; but no, the child was saved and he was glad,

that was sufficient--he cared not a straw for MY feelings,

or my loss of such a literary plum, snatched from my

very mouth at the instant it was ready to drop into it.

His selfishness was sufficient to place his own gratification

in being spared suffering clear before all concern for me,

his friend.  Apparently, he did not once reflect upon the

valuable details which would have fallen like a windfall

to me: fishing the child out--witnessing the surprise of

the family and the stir the thing would have made among the

peasants--then a Swiss funeral--then the roadside monument,

to be paid for by us and have our names mentioned in it.

And we should have gone into Baedeker and been immortal.

I was silent.  I was too much hurt to complain.  If he could

act so, and be so heedless and so frivolous at such a time,

and actually seem to glory in it, after all I had done for him,

I would have cut my hand off before I would let him see

that I was wounded.



We were approaching Zermatt; consequently, we were

approaching the renowned Matterhorn.  A month before,

this mountain had been only a name to us, but latterly

we had been moving through a steadily thickening double

row of pictures of it, done in oil, water, chromo, wood,

steel, copper, crayon, and photography, and so it had at

length become a shape to us--and a very distinct, decided,

and familiar one, too.  We were expecting to recognize

that mountain whenever or wherever we should run across it.

We were not deceived.  The monarch was far away when we

first saw him, but there was no such thing as mistaking him.

He has the rare peculiarity of standing by himself;

he is peculiarly steep, too, and is also most oddly shaped.

He towers into the sky like a colossal wedge, with the

upper third of its blade bent a little to the left.

The broad base of this monster wedge is planted upon

a grand glacier-paved Alpine platform whose elevation

is ten thousand feet above sea-level; as the wedge itself

is some five thousand feet high, it follows that its

apex is about fifteen thousand feet above sea-level.

So the whole bulk of this stately piece of rock, this

sky-cleaving monolith, is above the line of eternal snow.

Yet while all its giant neighbors have the look of being

built of solid snow, from their waists up, the Matterhorn

stands black and naked and forbidding, the year round,

or merely powdered or streaked with white in places,

for its sides are so steep that the snow cannot stay there.

Its strange form, its august isolation, and its majestic

unkinship with its own kind, make it--so to speak--the Napoleon

of the mountain world.  "Grand, gloomy, and peculiar,"

is a phrase which fits it as aptly as it fitted the great

captain.



Think of a monument a mile high, standing on a pedestal

two miles high! This is what the Matterhorn is--a monument.

Its office, henceforth, for all time, will be to keep

watch and ward over the secret resting-place of the young

Lord Douglas, who, in 1865, was precipitated from the

summit over a precipice four thousand feet high, and never

seen again.  No man ever had such a monument as this before;

the most imposing of the world's other monuments are

but atoms compared to it; and they will perish, and their

places will pass from memory, but this will remain. [1]



1.  The accident which cost Lord Douglas his life (see

    Chapter xii) also cost the lives of three other men.

    These three fell four-fifths of a mile, and their bodies

    were afterward found, lying side by side, upon a glacier,

    whence they were borne to Zermatt and buried in the

churchyard.

    The remains of Lord Douglas have never been found.

    The secret of his sepulture, like that of Moses, must remain

    a mystery always.



A walk from St. Nicholas to Zermatt is a wonderful experience.

Nature is built on a stupendous plan in that region.

One marches continually between walls that are piled

into the skies, with their upper heights broken into

a confusion of sublime shapes that gleam white and cold

against the background of blue; and here and there one

sees a big glacier displaying its grandeurs on the top

of a precipice, or a graceful cascade leaping and flashing

down the green declivities.  There is nothing tame,

or cheap, or trivial--it is all magnificent.  That short

valley is a picture-gallery of a notable kind, for it

contains no mediocrities; from end to end the Creator

has hung it with His masterpieces.



We made Zermatt at three in the afternoon, nine hours out

from St. Nicholas.  Distance, by guide-book, twelve miles;

by pedometer seventy-two. We were in the heart and home

of the mountain-climbers, now, as all visible things

testified.  The snow-peaks did not hold themselves aloof,

in aristocratic reserve; they nestled close around,

in a friendly, sociable way; guides, with the ropes and

axes and other implements of their fearful calling slung

about their persons, roosted in a long line upon a stone

wall in front of the hotel, and waited for customers;

sun-burnt climbers, in mountaineering costume, and followed

by their guides and porters, arrived from time to time,

from breakneck expeditions among the peaks and glaciers

of the High Alps; male and female tourists, on mules,

filed by, in a continuous procession, hotelward-bound from

wild adventures which would grow in grandeur very time

they were described at the English or American fireside,

and at last outgrow the possible itself.



We were not dreaming; this was not a make-believe home

of the Alp-climber, created by our heated imaginations;

no, for here was Mr. Girdlestone himself, the famous

Englishman who hunts his way to the most formidable Alpine

summits without a guide.  I was not equal to imagining

a Girdlestone; it was all I could do to even realize him,

while looking straight at him at short range.  I would rather

face whole Hyde Parks of artillery than the ghastly forms

of death which he has faced among the peaks and precipices

of the mountains.  There is probably no pleasure equal

to the pleasure of climbing a dangerous Alp; but it is

a pleasure which is confined strictly to people who can

find pleasure in it.  I have not jumped to this conclusion;

I have traveled to it per gravel-train, so to speak.

I have thought the thing all out, and am quite sure I

am right.  A born climber's appetite for climbing is hard

to satisfy; when it comes upon him he is like a starving

man with a feast before him; he may have other business

on hand, but it must wait.  Mr. Girdlestone had had

his usual summer holiday in the Alps, and had spent it

in his usual way, hunting for unique chances to break

his neck; his vacation was over, and his luggage packed

for England, but all of a sudden a hunger had come upon

him to climb the tremendous Weisshorn once more, for he

had heard of a new and utterly impossible route up it.

His baggage was unpacked at once, and now he and a friend,

laden with knapsacks, ice-axes, coils of rope, and canteens

of milk, were just setting out.  They would spend

the night high up among the snows, somewhere, and get

up at two in the morning and finish the enterprise.

I had a strong desire to go with them, but forced it down

--a feat which Mr. Girdlestone, with all his fortitude,

could not do.



Even ladies catch the climbing mania, and are unable to

throw it off.  A famous climber, of that sex, had attempted

the Weisshorn a few days before our arrival, and she

and her guides had lost their way in a snow-storm high up

among the peaks and glaciers and been forced to wander

around a good while before they could find a way down.

When this lady reached the bottom, she had been on her

feet twenty-three hours!



Our guides, hired on the Gemmi, were already at Zermatt

when we reached there.  So there was nothing to interfere

with our getting up an adventure whenever we should

choose the time and the object.  I resolved to devote

my first evening in Zermatt to studying up the subject

of Alpine climbing, by way of preparation.



I read several books, and here are some of the things

I found out.  One's shoes must be strong and heavy,

and have pointed hobnails in them.  The alpenstock

must be of the best wood, for if it should break,

loss of life might be the result.  One should carry an ax,

to cut steps in the ice with, on the great heights.

There must be a ladder, for there are steep bits of rock

which can be surmounted with this instrument--or this

utensil--but could not be surmounted without it;

such an obstruction has compelled the tourist to waste

hours hunting another route, when a ladder would have

saved him all trouble.  One must have from one hundred

and fifty to five hundred feet of strong rope, to be used

in lowering the party down steep declivities which are

too steep and smooth to be traversed in any other way.

One must have a steel hook, on another rope--a very

useful thing; for when one is ascending and comes to a low

bluff which is yet too high for the ladder, he swings

this rope aloft like a lasso, the hook catches at the top

of the bluff, and then the tourist climbs the rope,

hand over hand--being always particular to try and forget

that if the hook gives way he will never stop falling

till he arrives in some part of Switzerland where they

are not expecting him.  Another important thing--there

must be a rope to tie the whole party together with,

so that if one falls from a mountain or down a bottomless

chasm in a glacier, the others may brace back on the rope

and save him.  One must have a silk veil, to protect

his face from snow, sleet, hail and gale, and colored

goggles to protect his eyes from that dangerous enemy,

snow-blindness. Finally, there must be some porters,

to carry provisions, wine and scientific instruments,

and also blanket bags for the party to sleep in.



I closed my readings with a fearful adventure which

Mr. Whymper once had on the Matterhorn when he was prowling

around alone, five thousand feet above the town of Breil.

He was edging his way gingerly around the corner of a

precipice where the upper edge of a sharp declivity

of ice-glazed snow joined it.  This declivity swept

down a couple of hundred feet, into a gully which curved

around and ended at a precipice eight hundred feet high,

overlooking a glacier.  His foot slipped, and he fell.



He says:



"My knapsack brought my head down first, and I pitched into

some rocks about a dozen feet below; they caught something,

and tumbled me off the edge, head over heels, into the gully;

the baton was dashed from my hands, and I whirled downward

in a series of bounds, each longer than the last; now over ice,

now into rocks, striking my head four or five times,

each time with increased force.  The last bound sent me

spinning through the air in a leap of fifty or sixty feet,

from one side of the gully to the other, and I struck

the rocks, luckily, with the whole of my left side.

They caught my clothes for a moment, and I fell back on

to the snow with motion arrested.  My head fortunately

came the right side up, and a few frantic catches brought

me to a halt, in the neck of the gully and on the verge

of the precipice.  Baton, hat, and veil skimmed by

and disappeared, and the crash of the rocks--which I had

started--as they fell on to the glacier, told how narrow

had been the escape from utter destruction.  As it was,

I fell nearly two hundred feet in seven or eight bounds.

Ten feet more would have taken me in one gigantic leaps

of eight hundred feet on to the glacier below.



"The situation was sufficiently serious.  The rocks could

not be let go for a moment, and the blood was spurting

out of more than twenty cuts.  The most serious ones were

in the head, and I vainly tried to close them with one hand,

while holding on with the other.  It was useless;

the blood gushed out in blinding jets at each pulsation.

At last, in a moment of inspiration, I kicked out a big

lump of snow and struck it as plaster on my head.

The idea was a happy one, and the flow of blood diminished.

Then, scrambling up, I got, not a moment too soon, to a

place of safety, and fainted away.  The sun was setting

when consciousness returned, and it was pitch-dark before

the Great Staircase was descended; but by a combination

of luck and care, the whole four thousand seven hundred

feet of descent to Breil was accomplished without a slip,

or once missing the way."



His wounds kept him abed some days.  Then he got up

and climbed that mountain again.  That is the way with

a true Alp-climber; the more fun he has, the more he wants.







CHAPTER XXXVII

[Our Imposing Column Starts Upward]



After I had finished my readings, I was no longer myself;

I was tranced, uplifted, intoxicated, by the almost

incredible perils and adventures I had been following

my authors through, and the triumphs I had been sharing

with them.  I sat silent some time, then turned to Harris

and said:



"My mind is made up."



Something in my tone struck him: and when he glanced

at my eye and read what was written there, his face

paled perceptibly.  He hesitated a moment, then said:



"Speak."



I answered, with perfect calmness:



"I will ascend the Riffelberg."



If I had shot my poor friend he could not have fallen from

his chair more suddenly.  If I had been his father he could

not have pleaded harder to get me to give up my purpose.

But I turned a deaf ear to all he said.  When he perceived

at last that nothing could alter my determination,

he ceased to urge, and for a while the deep silence was

broken only by his sobs.  I sat in marble resolution,

with my eyes fixed upon vacancy, for in spirit I was already

wrestling with the perils of the mountains, and my friend

sat gazing at me in adoring admiration through his tears.

At last he threw himself upon me in a loving embrace and

exclaimed in broken tones:



"Your Harris will never desert you.  We will die together."



I cheered the noble fellow with praises, and soon his

fears were forgotten and he was eager for the adventure.

He wanted to summon the guides at once and leave at

two in the morning, as he supposed the custom was;

but I explained that nobody was looking at that hour;

and that the start in the dark was not usually made from

the village but from the first night's resting-place

on the mountain side.  I said we would leave the village

at 3 or 4 P.M. on the morrow; meantime he could notify

the guides, and also let the public know of the attempt

which we proposed to make.



I went to bed, but not to sleep.  No man can sleep when he

is about to undertake one of these Alpine exploits.

I tossed feverishly all night long, and was glad enough

when I heard the clock strike half past eleven and knew it

was time to get up for dinner.  I rose, jaded and rusty,

and went to the noon meal, where I found myself the center

of interest and curiosity; for the news was already abroad.

It is not easy to eat calmly when you are a lion; but it is

very pleasant, nevertheless.



As usual, at Zermatt, when a great ascent is about to

be undertaken, everybody, native and foreign, laid aside

his own projects and took up a good position to observe

the start.  The expedition consisted of 198 persons,

including the mules; or 205, including the cows.

As follows:



CHIEFS OF SERVICE SUBORDINATES



Myself 1 Veterinary Surgeon Mr. Harris 1 Butler 17

Guides 12 Waiters 4 Surgeons 1 Footman 1 Geologist 1

Barber 1 Botanist 1 Head Cook 3 Chaplains 9 Assistants

15 Barkeepers 1 Confectionery Artist 1 Latinist



TRANSPORTATION, ETC.



27 Porters 3 Coarse Washers and Ironers 44 Mules 1 Fine

ditto 44 Muleteers 7 Cows 2 Milkers



Total, 154 men, 51 animals.  Grand Total, 205.



RATIONS, ETC.  APPARATUS



16 Cases Hams 25 Spring Mattresses 2 Barrels Flour 2

Hair ditto 22 Barrels Whiskey Bedding for same 1 Barrel

Sugar 2 Mosquito-nets 1 Keg Lemons 29 Tents 2,000 Cigars

Scientific Instruments 1 Barrel Pies 97 Ice-axes 1 Ton

of Pemmican 5 Cases Dynamite 143 Pair Crutches 7 Cans

Nitroglycerin 2 Barrels Arnica 22 40-foot Ladders 1 Bale

of Lint 2 Miles of Rope 27 Kegs Paregoric 154 Umbrellas



It was full four o'clock in the afternoon before my cavalcade

was entirely ready.  At that hour it began to move.

In point of numbers and spectacular effect, it was the most

imposing expedition that had ever marched from Zermatt.



I commanded the chief guide to arrange the men and animals

in single file, twelve feet apart, and lash them all

together on a strong rope.  He objected that the first

two miles was a dead level, with plenty of room, and that

the rope was never used except in very dangerous places.

But I would not listen to that.  My reading had taught

me that many serious accidents had happened in the Alps

simply from not having the people tied up soon enough;

I was not going to add one to the list.  The guide then

obeyed my order.



When the procession stood at ease, roped together,

and ready to move, I never saw a finer sight.  It was 3,122

feet long--over half a mile; every man and me was on foot,

and had on his green veil and his blue goggles, and his

white rag around his hat, and his coil of rope over one

shoulder and under the other, and his ice-ax in his belt,

and carried his alpenstock in his left hand, his umbrella

(closed) in his right, and his crutches slung at his back.

The burdens of the pack-mules and the horns of the cows

were decked with the Edelweiss and the Alpine rose.



I and my agent were the only persons mounted.  We were

in the post of danger in the extreme rear, and tied

securely to five guides apiece.  Our armor-bearers carried

our ice-axes, alpenstocks, and other implements for us.

We were mounted upon very small donkeys, as a measure

of safety; in time of peril we could straighten our legs

and stand up, and let the donkey walk from under.

Still, I cannot recommend this sort of animal--at least

for excursions of mere pleasure--because his ears interrupt

the view.  I and my agent possessed the regulation

mountaineering costumes, but concluded to leave them behind.

Out of respect for the great numbers of tourists of both

sexes who would be assembled in front of the hotels

to see us pass, and also out of respect for the many

tourists whom we expected to encounter on our expedition,

we decided to make the ascent in evening dress.



We watered the caravan at the cold stream which rushes

down a trough near the end of the village, and soon

afterward left the haunts of civilization behind us.

About half past five o'clock we arrived at a bridge which

spans the Visp, and after throwing over a detachment to see

if it was safe, the caravan crossed without accident.

The way now led, by a gentle ascent, carpeted with

fresh green grass, to the church at Winkelmatten.

Without stopping to examine this edifice, I executed

a flank movement to the right and crossed the bridge

over the Findelenbach, after first testing its strength.

Here I deployed to the right again, and presently entered

an inviting stretch of meadowland which was unoccupied save

by a couple of deserted huts toward the furthest extremity.

These meadows offered an excellent camping-place. We

pitched our tents, supped, established a proper grade,

recorded the events of the day, and then went to bed.



We rose at two in the morning and dressed by candle-light. It

was a dismal and chilly business.  A few stars were shining,

but the general heavens were overcast, and the great shaft

of the Matterhorn was draped in a cable pall of clouds.

The chief guide advised a delay; he said he feared it

was going to rain.  We waited until nine o'clock, and then

got away in tolerably clear weather.



Our course led up some terrific steeps, densely wooded with

larches and cedars, and traversed by paths which the rains

had guttered and which were obstructed by loose stones.

To add to the danger and inconvenience, we were constantly

meeting returning tourists on foot and horseback,

and as constantly being crowded and battered by ascending

tourists who were in a hurry and wanted to get by.



Our troubles thickened.  About the middle of the afternoon

the seventeen guides called a halt and held a consultation.

After consulting an hour they said their first suspicion

remained intact--that is to say, they believed they

were lost.  I asked if they did not KNOW it? No, they said,

they COULDN'T absolutely know whether they were lost or not,

because none of them had ever been in that part of the

country before.  They had a strong instinct that they

were lost, but they had no proofs--except that they

did not know where they were.  They had met no tourists

for some time, and they considered that a suspicious sign.



Plainly we were in an ugly fix.  The guides were naturally

unwilling to go alone and seek a way out of the difficulty;

so we all went together.  For better security we moved

slow and cautiously, for the forest was very dense.

We did not move up the mountain, but around it, hoping to

strike across the old trail.  Toward nightfall, when we

were about tired out, we came up against a rock as big

as a cottage.  This barrier took all the remaining spirit

out of the men, and a panic of fear and despair ensued.

They moaned and wept, and said they should never see

their homes and their dear ones again.  Then they began

to upbraid me for bringing them upon this fatal expedition.

Some even muttered threats against me.



Clearly it was no time to show weakness.  So I made

a speech in which I said that other Alp-climbers had been

in as perilous a position as this, and yet by courage

and perseverance had escaped.  I promised to stand by them,

I promised to rescue them.  I closed by saying we had plenty

of provisions to maintain us for quite a siege--and did they

suppose Zermatt would allow half a mile of men and mules

to mysteriously disappear during any considerable time,

right above their noses, and make no inquiries? No,

Zermatt would send out searching-expeditions and we should be

saved.



This speech had a great effect.  The men pitched the tents

with some little show of cheerfulness, and we were snugly

under cover when the night shut down.  I now reaped

the reward of my wisdom in providing one article which is

not mentioned in any book of Alpine adventure but this.

I refer to the paregoric.  But for that beneficent drug,

would have not one of those men slept a moment during that

fearful night.  But for that gentle persuader they must

have tossed, unsoothed, the night through; for the whiskey

was for me.  Yes, they would have risen in the morning

unfitted for their heavy task.  As it was, everybody slept

but my agent and me--only we and the barkeepers.

I would not permit myself to sleep at such a time.

I considered myself responsible for all those lives.

I meant to be on hand and ready, in case of avalanches

up there, but I did not know it then.



We watched the weather all through that awful night,

and kept an eye on the barometer, to be prepared for

the least change.  There was not the slightest change

recorded by the instrument, during the whole time.

Words cannot describe the comfort that that friendly,

hopeful, steadfast thing was to me in that season

of trouble.  It was a defective barometer, and had no hand

but the stationary brass pointer, but I did not know that

until afterward.  If I should be in such a situation again,

I should not wish for any barometer but that one.



All hands rose at two in the morning and took breakfast,

and as soon as it was light we roped ourselves together

and went at that rock.  For some time we tried the hook-rope

and other means of scaling it, but without success--that is,

without perfect success.  The hook caught once, and Harris

started up it hand over hand, but the hold broke and if

there had not happened to be a chaplain sitting underneath

at the time, Harris would certainly have been crippled.

As it was, it was the chaplain.  He took to his crutches,

and I ordered the hook-rope to be laid aside.

It was too dangerous an implement where so many people

are standing around.



We were puzzled for a while; then somebody thought of

the ladders.  One of these was leaned against the rock,

and the men went up it tied together in couples.

Another ladder was sent up for use in descending.

At the end of half an hour everybody was over, and that rock

was conquered.  We gave our first grand shout of triumph.

But the joy was short-lived, for somebody asked how we were

going to get the animals over.



This was a serious difficulty; in fact, it was an impossibility.

The courage of the men began to waver immediately; once more

we were threatened with a panic.  But when the danger

was most imminent, we were saved in a mysterious way.

A mule which had attracted attention from the beginning

by its disposition to experiment, tried to eat a five-pound

can of nitroglycerin.  This happened right alongside

the rock.  The explosion threw us all to the ground,

and covered us with dirt and debris; it frightened

us extremely, too, for the crash it made was deafening,

and the violence of the shock made the ground tremble.

However, we were grateful, for the rock was gone.

Its place was occupied by a new cellar, about thirty

feet across, by fifteen feet deep.  The explosion was

heard as far as Zermatt; and an hour and a half afterward,

many citizens of that town were knocked down and quite

seriously injured by descending portions of mule meat,

frozen solid.  This shows, better than any estimate

in figures, how high the experimenter went.



We had nothing to do, now, but bridge the cellar and proceed

on our way.  With a cheer the men went at their work.

I attended to the engineering, myself.  I appointed a strong

detail to cut down trees with ice-axes and trim them for

piers to support the bridge.  This was a slow business,

for ice-axes are not good to cut wood with.  I caused

my piers to be firmly set up in ranks in the cellar,

and upon them I laid six of my forty-foot ladders,

side by side, and laid six more on top of them.

Upon this bridge I caused a bed of boughs to be spread,

and on top of the boughs a bed of earth six inches deep.

I stretched ropes upon either side to serve as railings,

and then my bridge was complete.  A train of elephants

could have crossed it in safety and comfort.  By nightfall

the caravan was on the other side and the ladders were

taken up.



Next morning we went on in good spirits for a while,

though our way was slow and difficult, by reason of the

steep and rocky nature of the ground and the thickness

of the forest; but at last a dull despondency crept into

the men's faces and it was apparent that not only they,

but even the guides, were now convinced that we were lost.

The fact that we still met no tourists was a circumstance

that was but too significant.  Another thing seemed to

suggest that we were not only lost, but very badly lost;

for there must surely be searching-parties on the road

before this time, yet we had seen no sign of them.



Demoralization was spreading; something must be done,

and done quickly, too.  Fortunately, I am not unfertile

in expedients.  I contrived one now which commended itself

to all, for it promised well.  I took three-quarters

of a mile of rope and fastened one end of it around

the waist of a guide, and told him to go find the road,

while the caravan waited.  I instructed him to guide himself

back by the rope, in case of failure; in case of success,

he was to give the rope a series of violent jerks,

whereupon the Expedition would go to him at once.

He departed, and in two minutes had disappeared among

the trees.  I payed out the rope myself, while everybody

watched the crawling thing with eager eyes.  The rope

crept away quite slowly, at times, at other times with

some briskness.  Twice or thrice we seemed to get the signal,

and a shout was just ready to break from the men's lips

when they perceived it was a false alarm.  But at last,

when over half a mile of rope had slidden away, it stopped

gliding and stood absolutely still--one minute--two

minutes--three--while we held our breath and watched.



Was the guide resting? Was he scanning the country from

some high point? Was he inquiring of a chance mountaineer?

Stop,--had he fainted from excess of fatigue and anxiety?



This thought gave us a shock.  I was in the very first act

of detailing an Expedition to succor him, when the cord

was assailed with a series of such frantic jerks that I

could hardly keep hold of it.  The huzza that went up,

then, was good to hear.  "Saved! saved!" was the word

that rang out, all down the long rank of the caravan.



We rose up and started at once.  We found the route to be

good enough for a while, but it began to grow difficult,

by and by, and this feature steadily increased.  When we

judged we had gone half a mile, we momently expected

to see the guide; but no, he was not visible anywhere;

neither was he waiting, for the rope was still moving,

consequently he was doing the same.  This argued that he

had not found the road, yet, but was marching to it

with some peasant.  There was nothing for us to do but

plod along--and this we did.  At the end of three hours

we were still plodding.  This was not only mysterious,

but exasperating.  And very fatiguing, too; for we had

tried hard, along at first, to catch up with the guide,

but had only fagged ourselves, in vain; for although he

was traveling slowly he was yet able to go faster than the

hampered caravan over such ground.



At three in the afternoon we were nearly dead with

exhaustion--and still the rope was slowly gliding out.

The murmurs against the guide had been growing steadily,

and at last they were become loud and savage.

A mutiny ensued.  The men refused to proceed.  They declared

that we had been traveling over and over the same ground

all day, in a kind of circle.  They demanded that our

end of the rope be made fast to a tree, so as to halt

the guide until we could overtake him and kill him.

This was not an unreasonable requirement, so I gave the order.



As soon as the rope was tied, the Expedition moved

forward with that alacrity which the thirst for

vengeance usually inspires.  But after a tiresome march

of almost half a mile, we came to a hill covered thick

with a crumbly rubbish of stones, and so steep that no

man of us all was now in a condition to climb it.

Every attempt failed, and ended in crippling somebody.

Within twenty minutes I had five men on crutches.

Whenever a climber tried to assist himself by the rope,

it yielded and let him tumble backward.  The frequency

of this result suggested an idea to me.  I ordered

the caravan to 'bout face and form in marching order;

I then made the tow-rope fast to the rear mule, and gave

the command:



"Mark time--by the right flank--forward--march!"



The procession began to move, to the impressive strains

of a battle-chant, and I said to myself, "Now, if the rope

don't break I judge THIS will fetch that guide into the camp."

I watched the rope gliding down the hill, and presently

when I was all fixed for triumph I was confronted

by a bitter disappointment; there was no guide tied

to the rope, it was only a very indignant old black ram.

The fury of the baffled Expedition exceeded all bounds.

They even wanted to wreak their unreasoning vengeance on this

innocent dumb brute.  But I stood between them and their prey,

menaced by a bristling wall of ice-axes and alpenstocks,

and proclaimed that there was but one road to this murder,

and it was directly over my corpse.  Even as I spoke I

saw that my doom was sealed, except a miracle supervened

to divert these madmen from their fell purpose.  I see

the sickening wall of weapons now; I see that advancing

host as I saw it then, I see the hate in those cruel eyes;

I remember how I drooped my head upon my breast,

I feel again the sudden earthquake shock in my rear,

administered by the very ram I was sacrificing myself to save;

I hear once more the typhoon of laughter that burst from

the assaulting column as I clove it from van to rear

like a Sepoy shot from a Rodman gun.



I was saved.  Yes, I was saved, and by the merciful instinct

of ingratitude which nature had planted in the breast

of that treacherous beast.  The grace which eloquence

had failed to work in those men's hearts, had been wrought

by a laugh.  The ram was set free and my life was spared.



We lived to find out that that guide had deserted us as soon

as he had placed a half-mile between himself and us.

To avert suspicion, he had judged it best that the line

should continue to move; so he caught that ram, and at

the time that he was sitting on it making the rope fast

to it, we were imagining that he was lying in a swoon,

overcome by fatigue and distress.  When he allowed the ram

to get up it fell to plunging around, trying to rid itself

of the rope, and this was the signal which we had risen

up with glad shouts to obey.  We had followed this ram

round and round in a circle all day--a thing which was

proven by the discovery that we had watered the Expedition

seven times at one and same spring in seven hours.

As expert a woodman as I am, I had somehow failed to notice

this until my attention was called to it by a hog.

This hog was always wallowing there, and as he was the

only hog we saw, his frequent repetition, together with

his unvarying similarity to himself, finally caused me

to reflect that he must be the same hog, and this led

me to the deduction that this must be the same spring,

also--which indeed it was.



I made a note of this curious thing, as showing

in a striking manner the relative difference between

glacial action and the action of the hog.  It is now

a well-established fact that glaciers move; I consider

that my observations go to show, with equal conclusiveness,

that a hog in a spring does not move.  I shall be glad

to receive the opinions of other observers upon this point.



To return, for an explanatory moment, to that guide,

and then I shall be done with him.  After leaving the ram

tied to the rope, he had wandered at large a while,

and then happened to run across a cow.  Judging that

a cow would naturally know more than a guide, he took

her by the tail, and the result justified his judgment.

She nibbled her leisurely way downhill till it was near

milking-time, then she struck for home and towed him

into Zermatt.







CHAPTER XXXVIII

[I Conquer the Gorner Grat]



We went into camp on that wild spot to which that ram

had brought us.  The men were greatly fatigued.

Their conviction that we were lost was forgotten in the cheer

of a good supper, and before the reaction had a chance

to set in, I loaded them up with paregoric and put them to bed.



Next morning I was considering in my mind our desperate

situation and trying to think of a remedy, when Harris

came to me with a Baedeker map which showed conclusively

that the mountain we were on was still in Switzerland--yes,

every part of it was in Switzerland.  So we were not lost,

after all.  This was an immense relief; it lifted the weight

of two such mountains from my breast.  I immediately

had the news disseminated and the map was exhibited.

The effect was wonderful.  As soon as the men saw with

their own eyes that they knew where they were, and that it

was only the summit that was lost and not themselves,

they cheered up instantly and said with one accord,

let the summit take care of itself.



Our distresses being at an end, I now determined to rest

the men in camp and give the scientific department of the

Expedition a chance.  First, I made a barometric observation,

to get our altitude, but I could not perceive that there

was any result.  I knew, by my scientific reading,

that either thermometers or barometers ought to be boiled,

to make them accurate; I did not know which it was,

so I boiled them both.  There was still no result;

so I examined these instruments and discovered that they

possessed radical blemishes: the barometer had no hand

but the brass pointer and the ball of the thermometer was

stuffed with tin-foil. I might have boiled those things

to rags, and never found out anything.



I hunted up another barometer; it was new and perfect.

I boiled it half an hour in a pot of bean soup which

the cooks were making.  The result was unexpected: the

instrument was not affecting at all, but there was such

a strong barometer taste to the soup that the head cook,

who was a most conscientious person, changed its name

in the bill of fare.  The dish was so greatly liked by all,

that I ordered the cook to have barometer soup every day.

It was believed that the barometer might eventually

be injured, but I did not care for that.  I had demonstrated

to my satisfaction that it could not tell how high

a mountain was, therefore I had no real use for it.

Changes in the weather I could take care of without it;

I did not wish to know when the weather was going to be good,

what I wanted to know was when it was going to be bad,

and this I could find out from Harris's corns.  Harris had

had his corns tested and regulated at the government

observatory in Heidelberg, and one could depend upon them

with confidence.  So I transferred the new barometer to

the cooking department, to be used for the official mess.

It was found that even a pretty fair article of soup could

be made from the defective barometer; so I allowed that one

to be transferred to the subordinate mess.



I next boiled the thermometer, and got a most excellent result;

the mercury went up to about 200 degrees Fahrenheit.

In the opinion of the other scientists of the Expedition,

this seemed to indicate that we had attained the extraordinary

altitude of two hundred thousand feet above sea-level.

Science places the line of eternal snow at about ten thousand

feet above sea-level. There was no snow where we were,

consequently it was proven that the eternal snow-line

ceases somewhere above the ten-thousand-foot level and

does not begin any more.  This was an interesting fact,

and one which had not been observed by any observer before.

It was as valuable as interesting, too, since it would open

up the deserted summits of the highest Alps to population

and agriculture.  It was a proud thing to be where we were,

yet it caused us a pang to reflect that but for that ram we

might just as well been two hundred thousand feet higher.



The success of my last experiment induced me to try an

experiment with my photographic apparatus.  I got it out,

and boiled one of my cameras, but the thing was a failure;

it made the wood swell up and burst, and I could not see

that the lenses were any better than they were before.



I now concluded to boil a guide.  It might improve him,

it could not impair his usefulness.  But I was not

allowed to proceed.  Guides have no feeling for science,

and this one would not consent to be made uncomfortable

in its interest.



In the midst of my scientific work, one of those

needless accidents happened which are always occurring

among the ignorant and thoughtless.  A porter shot

at a chamois and missed it and crippled the Latinist.

This was not a serious matter to me, for a Latinist's

duties are as well performed on crutches as otherwise

--but the fact remained that if the Latinist had not

happened to be in the way a mule would have got

that load.  That would have been quite another matter,

for when it comes down to a question of value there is

a palpable difference between a Latinist and a mule.

I could not depend on having a Latinist in the right

place every time; so, to make things safe, I ordered

that in the future the chamois must not be hunted within

limits of the camp with any other weapon than the forefinger.



My nerves had hardly grown quiet after this affair when

they got another shake-up--one which utterly unmanned

me for a moment: a rumor swept suddenly through the camp

that one of the barkeepers had fallen over a precipice!



However, it turned out that it was only a chaplain.

I had laid in an extra force of chaplains, purposely to

be prepared for emergencies like this, but by some

unaccountable oversight had come away rather short-handed

in the matter of barkeepers.



On the following morning we moved on, well refreshed and in

good spirits.  I remember this day with peculiar pleasure,

because it saw our road restored to us.  Yes, we found

our road again, and in quite an extraordinary way.

We had plodded along some two hours and a half, when we came

up against a solid mass of rock about twenty feet high.

I did not need to be instructed by a mule this time.

I was already beginning to know more than any mule in

the Expedition.  I at once put in a blast of dynamite,

and lifted that rock out of the way.  But to my surprise

and mortification, I found that there had been a chalet

on top of it.



I picked up such members of the family as fell in my vicinity,

and subordinates of my corps collected the rest.

None of these poor people were injured, happily, but they

were much annoyed.  I explained to the head chaleteer

just how the thing happened, and that I was only searching

for the road, and would certainly have given him timely

notice if I had known he was up there.  I said I had

meant no harm, and hoped I had not lowered myself in

his estimation by raising him a few rods in the air.

I said many other judicious things, and finally when I

offered to rebuild his chalet, and pay for the breakages,

and throw in the cellar, he was mollified and satisfied.

He hadn't any cellar at all, before; he would not have

as good a view, now, as formerly, but what he had lost

in view he had gained in cellar, by exact measurement.

He said there wasn't another hole like that in the mountains

--and he would have been right if the late mule had not tried

to eat up the nitroglycerin.



I put a hundred and sixteen men at work, and they rebuilt

the chalet from its own debris in fifteen minutes.

It was a good deal more picturesque than it was before,

too.  The man said we were now on the Feil-Stutz, above

the Schwegmatt--information which I was glad to get,

since it gave us our position to a degree of particularity

which we had not been accustomed to for a day or so.

We also learned that we were standing at the foot

of the Riffelberg proper, and that the initial chapter

of our work was completed.



We had a fine view, from here, of the energetic Visp,

as it makes its first plunge into the world from under a huge

arch of solid ice, worn through the foot-wall of the great

Gorner Glacier; and we could also see the Furggenbach,

which is the outlet of the Furggen Glacier.



The mule-road to the summit of the Riffelberg passed right

in front of the chalet, a circumstance which we almost

immediately noticed, because a procession of tourists was

filing along it pretty much all the time.  [1] The chaleteer's

business consisted in furnishing refreshments to tourists.

My blast had interrupted this trade for a few minutes,

by breaking all the bottles on the place; but I gave

the man a lot of whiskey to sell for Alpine champagne,

and a lot of vinegar which would answer for Rhine wine,

consequently trade was soon as brisk as ever.



1.  "Pretty much" may not be elegant English, but it is

    high time it was.  There is no elegant word or phrase

    which means just what it means.--M.T.



Leaving the Expedition outside to rest, I quartered myself

in the chalet, with Harris, proposing to correct my journals

and scientific observations before continuing the ascent.

I had hardly begun my work when a tall, slender, vigorous

American youth of about twenty-three, who was on his

way down the mountain, entered and came toward me with

that breeze self-complacency which is the adolescent's

idea of the well-bred ease of the man of the world.

His hair was short and parted accurately in the middle,

and he had all the look of an American person who would

be likely to begin his signature with an initial,

and spell his middle name out.  He introduced himself,

smiling a smirky smile borrowed from the courtiers

of the stage, extended a fair-skinned talon, and while

he gripped my hand in it he bent his body forward

three times at the hips, as the stage courtier does,

and said in the airiest and most condescending

and patronizing way--I quite remember his exact language:



"Very glad to make your acquaintance, 'm sure; very glad indeed,

assure you.  I've read all your little efforts and greatly

admired them, and when I heard you were here, I ..."



I indicated a chair, and he sat down.  This grandee was

the grandson of an American of considerable note in his day,

and not wholly forgotten yet--a man who came so near

being a great man that he was quite generally accounted

one while he lived.



I slowly paced the floor, pondering scientific problems,

and heard this conversation:



GRANDSON.  First visit to Europe?



HARRIS.  Mine? Yes.



G.S. (With a soft reminiscent sigh suggestive of bygone

joys that may be tasted in their freshness but once.)

Ah, I know what it is to you.  A first visit!--ah,

the romance of it! I wish I could feel it again.



H. Yes, I find it exceeds all my dreams.  It is enchantment.

I go...



G.S. (With a dainty gesture of the hand signifying "Spare

me your callow enthusiasms, good friend.") Yes, _I_ know,

I know; you go to cathedrals, and exclaim; and you drag

through league-long picture-galleries and exclaim; and you

stand here, and there, and yonder, upon historic ground,

and continue to exclaim; and you are permeated with

your first crude conceptions of Art, and are proud

and happy.  Ah, yes, proud and happy--that expresses it.

Yes-yes, enjoy it--it is right--it is an innocent revel.



H. And you? Don't you do these things now?



G.S. I! Oh, that is VERY good! My dear sir, when you

are as old a traveler as I am, you will not ask such

a question as that.  _I_ visit the regulation gallery,

moon around the regulation cathedral, do the worn round

of the regulation sights, YET?--Excuse me!



H. Well, what DO you do, then?



G.S. Do? I flit--and flit--for I am ever on the wing--but I

avoid the herd.  Today I am in Paris, tomorrow in Berlin,

anon in Rome; but you would look for me in vain in the

galleries of the Louvre or the common resorts of the

gazers in those other capitals.  If you would find me,

you must look in the unvisited nooks and corners where

others never think of going.  One day you will find me

making myself at home in some obscure peasant's cabin,

another day you will find me in some forgotten castle

worshiping some little gem or art which the careless eye

has overlooked and which the unexperienced would despise;

again you will find me as guest in the inner sanctuaries

of palaces while the herd is content to get a hurried

glimpse of the unused chambers by feeing a servant.



H. You are a GUEST in such places?



G.S. And a welcoming one.



H. It is surprising.  How does it come?



G.S. My grandfather's name is a passport to all the courts

in Europe.  I have only to utter that name and every

door is open to me.  I flit from court to court at my

own free will and pleasure, and am always welcome.

I am as much at home in the palaces of Europe as you are

among your relatives.  I know every titled person in Europe,

I think.  I have my pockets full of invitations all the time.

I am under promise to go to Italy, where I am to be the

guest of a succession of the noblest houses in the land.

In Berlin my life is a continued round of gaiety in the

imperial palace.  It is the same, wherever I go.



H. It must be very pleasant.  But it must make Boston

seem a little slow when you are at home.



G.S. Yes, of course it does.  But I don't go home much.

There's no life there--little to feed a man's higher nature.

Boston's very narrow, you know.  She doesn't know it, and you

couldn't convince her of it--so I say nothing when I'm

there: where's the use? Yes, Boston is very narrow, but she

has such a good opinion of herself that she can't see it.

A man who has traveled as much as I have, and seen as much

of the world, sees it plain enough, but he can't cure it,

you know, so the best is to leave it and seek a sphere

which is more in harmony with his tastes and culture.

I run across there, one a year, perhaps, when I have

nothing important on hand, but I'm very soon back again.

I spend my time in Europe.



H. I see.  You map out your plans and ...



G.S. No, excuse me.  I don't map out any plans.  I simply

follow the inclination of the day.  I am limited by no ties,

no requirements, I am not bound in any way.  I am too old

a traveler to hamper myself with deliberate purposes.

I am simply a traveler--an inveterate traveler--a man of

the world, in a word--I can call myself by no other name.

I do not say, "I am going here, or I am going there"--I

say nothing at all, I only act.  For instance, next week

you may find me the guest of a grandee of Spain, or you

may find me off for Venice, or flitting toward Dresden.

I shall probably go to Egypt presently; friends will say

to friends, "He is at the Nile cataracts"--and at that

very moment they will be surprised to learn that I'm away

off yonder in India somewhere.  I am a constant surprise

to people.  They are always saying, "Yes, he was in Jerusalem

when we heard of him last, but goodness knows where he

is now."



Presently the Grandson rose to leave--discovered he

had an appointment with some Emperor, perhaps.  He did

his graces over again: gripped me with one talon,

at arm's-length, pressed his hat against his stomach

with the other, bent his body in the middle three times,

murmuring:



"Pleasure, 'm sure; great pleasure, 'm sure.  Wish you

much success."



Then he removed his gracious presence.  It is a great

and solemn thing to have a grandfather.



I have not purposed to misrepresent this boy in any way,

for what little indignation he excited in me soon

passed and left nothing behind it but compassion.

One cannot keep up a grudge against a vacuum.

I have tried to repeat this lad's very words;

if I have failed anywhere I have at least not failed

to reproduce the marrow and meaning of what he said.

He and the innocent chatterbox whom I met on the Swiss

lake are the most unique and interesting specimens of

Young America I came across during my foreign tramping.

I have made honest portraits of them, not caricatures.

The Grandson of twenty-three referred to himself five

or six times as an "old traveler," and as many as three

times (with a serene complacency which was maddening)

as a "man of the world." There was something very delicious

about his leaving Boston to her "narrowness," unreproved

and uninstructed.



I formed the caravan in marching order, presently,

and after riding down the line to see that it was

properly roped together, gave the command to proceed.

In a little while the road carried us to open, grassy land.

We were above the troublesome forest, now, and had an

uninterrupted view, straight before us, of our summit

--the summit of the Riffelberg.



We followed the mule-road, a zigzag course, now to the right,

now to the left, but always up, and always crowded and

incommoded by going and coming files of reckless tourists

who were never, in a single instance, tied together.

I was obliged to exert the utmost care and caution,

for in many places the road was not two yards wide,

and often the lower side of it sloped away in slanting

precipices eight and even nine feet deep.  I had to

encourage the men constantly, to keep them from giving

way to their unmanly fears.



We might have made the summit before night, but for a

delay caused by the loss of an umbrella.  I was allowing

the umbrella to remain lost, but the men murmured,

and with reason, for in this exposed region we stood

in peculiar need of protection against avalanches;

so I went into camp and detached a strong party to go

after the missing article.



The difficulties of the next morning were severe,

but our courage was high, for our goal was near.

At noon we conquered the last impediment--we stood

at last upon the summit, and without the loss of a

single man except the mule that ate the glycerin.

Our great achievement was achieved--the possibility of

the impossible was demonstrated, and Harris and I walked

proudly into the great dining-room of the Riffelberg

Hotel and stood our alpenstocks up in the corner.



Yes, I had made the grand ascent; but it was a mistake

to do it in evening dress.  The plug hats were battered,

the swallow-tails were fluttering rags, mud added no grace,

the general effect was unpleasant and even disreputable.



There were about seventy-five tourists at the hotel

--mainly ladies and little children--and they gave us

an admiring welcome which paid us for all our privations

and sufferings.  The ascent had been made, and the names

and dates now stand recorded on a stone monument there

to prove it to all future tourists.



I boiled a thermometer and took an altitude, with a most

curious result: THE SUMMIT WAS NOT AS HIGH AS THE POINT ON

THE MOUNTAINSIDE WHERE I HAD TAKEN THE FIRST ALTITUDE.

Suspecting that I had made an important discovery,

I prepared to verify it.  There happened to be a still

higher summit (called the Gorner Grat), above the hotel,

and notwithstanding the fact that it overlooks a glacier

from a dizzy height, and that the ascent is difficult

and dangerous, I resolved to venture up there and boil

a thermometer.  So I sent a strong party, with some

borrowed hoes, in charge of two chiefs of service, to dig

a stairway in the soil all the way up, and this I ascended,

roped to the guides.  This breezy height was the summit

proper--so I accomplished even more than I had originally

purposed to do.  This foolhardy exploit is recorded on

another stone monument.



I boiled my thermometer, and sure enough, this spot,

which purported to be two thousand feet higher than the

locality of the hotel, turned out to be nine thousand

feet LOWER.  Thus the fact was clearly demonstrated that,

ABOVE A CERTAIN POINT, THE HIGHER A POINT SEEMS TO BE,

THE LOWER IT ACTUALLY IS.  Our ascent itself was a

great achievement, but this contribution to science was

an inconceivably greater matter.



Cavilers object that water boils at a lower and lower

temperature the higher and higher you go, and hence the

apparent anomaly.  I answer that I do not base my theory

upon what the boiling water does, but upon what a boiled

thermometer says.  You can't go behind the thermometer.



I had a magnificent view of Monte Rosa, and apparently

all the rest of the Alpine world, from that high place.

All the circling horizon was piled high with a mighty

tumult of snowy crests.  One might have imagined he

saw before him the tented camps of a beleaguering host

of Brobdingnagians.



But lonely, conspicuous, and superb, rose that wonderful

upright wedge, the Matterhorn.  Its precipitous sides were

powdered over with snow, and the upper half hidden in thick

clouds which now and then dissolved to cobweb films and gave

brief glimpses of the imposing tower as through a veil.

[2] A little later the Matterhorn took to himself the

semblance of a volcano; he was stripped naked to his apex

--around this circled vast wreaths of white cloud which strung

slowly out and streamed away slantwise toward the sun,

a twenty-mile stretch of rolling and tumbling vapor,

and looking just as if it were pouring out of a crater.

Later again, one of the mountain's sides was clean and clear,

and another side densely clothed from base to summit in

thick smokelike cloud which feathered off and flew around

the shaft's sharp edge like the smoke around the corners of

a burning building.  The Matterhorn is always experimenting,

and always gets up fine effects, too.  In the sunset,

when all the lower world is palled in gloom, it points

toward heaven out of the pervading blackness like a finger

of fire.  In the sunrise--well, they say it is very fine

in the sunrise.



2.  NOTE.--I had the very unusual luck to catch one little

    momentary glimpse of the Matterhorn wholly unencumbered

    by clouds.  I leveled my photographic apparatus at it

    without the loss of an instant, and should have got

    an elegant picture if my donkey had not interfered.

    It was my purpose to draw this photograph all by myself

    for my book, but was obliged to put the mountain part

    of it into the hands of the professional artist because

    I found I could not do landscape well.



Authorities agree that there is no such tremendous "layout"

of snowy Alpine magnitude, grandeur, and sublimity to be

seen from any other accessible point as the tourist may see

from the summit of the Riffelberg.  Therefore, let the

tourist rope himself up and go there; for I have shown

that with nerve, caution, and judgment, the thing can be done.



I wish to add one remark, here--in parentheses, so to speak

--suggested by the word "snowy," which I have just used.

We have all seen hills and mountains and levels with snow

on them, and so we think we know all the aspects and

effects produced by snow.  But indeed we do not until

we have seen the Alps.  Possibly mass and distance add

something--at any rate, something IS added.  Among other

noticeable things, there is a dazzling, intense whiteness

about the distant Alpine snow, when the sun is on it,

which one recognizes as peculiar, and not familiar to

the eye.  The snow which one is accustomed to has a tint

to it--painters usually give it a bluish cast--but there

is no perceptible tint to the distant Alpine snow when it

is trying to look its whitest.  As to the unimaginable

splendor of it when the sun is blazing down on it--well,

it simply IS unimaginable.







CHAPTER XXXIX

[We Travel by Glacier]



A guide-book is a queer thing.  The reader has just seen

what a man who undertakes the great ascent from Zermatt

to the Riffelberg Hotel must experience.  Yet Baedeker

makes these strange statements concerning this matter:



1.  Distance--3 hours.

2.  The road cannot be mistaken.

3.  Guide unnecessary.

4.  Distance from Riffelberg Hotel to the Gorner Grat,

    one hour and a half.

5.  Ascent simple and easy.  Guide unnecessary.

6.  Elevation of Zermatt above sea-level, 5,315 feet.

7.  Elevation of Riffelberg Hotel above sea-level,

    8,429 feet.

8.  Elevation of the Gorner Grat above sea-level, 10,289 feet.



I have pretty effectually throttled these errors by sending

him the following demonstrated facts:



1.  Distance from Zermatt to Riffelberg Hotel, 7 days.

2.  The road CAN be mistaken.  If I am the first that did it,

    I want the credit of it, too.

3.  Guides ARE necessary, for none but a native can read

    those finger-boards.

4.  The estimate of the elevation of the several localities

    above sea-level is pretty correct--for Baedeker.

    He only misses it about a hundred and eighty or ninety

    thousand feet.



I found my arnica invaluable.  My men were suffering

excruciatingly, from the friction of sitting down so much.

During two or three days, not one of them was able to do

more than lie down or walk about; yet so effective was

the arnica, that on the fourth all were able to sit up.

I consider that, more than to anything else, I owe the

success of our great undertaking to arnica and paregoric.



My men are being restored to health and strength,

my main perplexity, now, was how to get them down

the mountain again.  I was not willing to expose the

brave fellows to the perils, fatigues, and hardships

of that fearful route again if it could be helped.

First I thought of balloons; but, of course, I had to

give that idea up, for balloons were not procurable.

I thought of several other expedients, but upon

consideration discarded them, for cause.  But at last

I hit it.  I was aware that the movement of glaciers

is an established fact, for I had read it in Baedeker;

so I resolved to take passage for Zermatt on the great

Gorner Glacier.



Very good.  The next thing was, how to get down the

glacier comfortably--for the mule-road to it was long,

and winding, and wearisome.  I set my mind at work,

and soon thought out a plan.  One looks straight down

upon the vast frozen river called the Gorner Glacier,

from the Gorner Grat, a sheer precipice twelve hundred

feet high.  We had one hundred and fifty-four umbrellas

--and what is an umbrella but a parachute?



I mentioned this noble idea to Harris, with enthusiasm,

and was about to order the Expedition to form on the

Gorner Grat, with their umbrellas, and prepare for

flight by platoons, each platoon in command of a guide,

when Harris stopped me and urged me not to be too hasty.

He asked me if this method of descending the Alps had

ever been tried before.  I said no, I had not heard

of an instance.  Then, in his opinion, it was a matter

of considerable gravity; in his opinion it would not be

well to send the whole command over the cliff at once;

a better way would be to send down a single individual,

first, and see how he fared.



I saw the wisdom in this idea instantly.  I said as much,

and thanked my agent cordially, and told him to take

his umbrella and try the thing right away, and wave

his hat when he got down, if he struck in a soft place,

and then I would ship the rest right along.



Harris was greatly touched with this mark of confidence,

and said so, in a voice that had a perceptible tremble in it;

but at the same time he said he did not feel himself worthy

of so conspicuous a favor; that it might cause jealousy

in the command, for there were plenty who would not hesitate

to say he had used underhanded means to get the appointment,

whereas his conscience would bear him witness that he

had not sought it at all, nor even, in his secret heart,

desired it.



I said these words did him extreme credit, but that he must not

throw away the imperishable distinction of being the first man

to descend an Alp per parachute, simply to save the feelings

of some envious underlings.  No, I said, he MUST accept

the appointment--it was no longer an invitation, it was a

command.



He thanked me with effusion, and said that putting

the thing in this form removed every objection.

He retired, and soon returned with his umbrella, his eye

flaming with gratitude and his cheeks pallid with joy.

Just then the head guide passed along.  Harris's expression

changed to one of infinite tenderness, and he said:



"That man did me a cruel injury four days ago, and I

said in my heart he should live to perceive and confess

that the only noble revenge a man can take upon his enemy

is to return good for evil.  I resign in his favor.

Appoint him."



I threw my arms around the generous fellow and said:



"Harris, you are the noblest soul that lives.  You shall

not regret this sublime act, neither shall the world

fail to know of it.  You shall have opportunity far

transcending this one, too, if I live--remember that."



I called the head guide to me and appointed him on

the spot.  But the thing aroused no enthusiasm in him.

He did not take to the idea at all.



He said:



"Tie myself to an umbrella and jump over the Gorner

Grat! Excuse me, there are a great many pleasanter roads

to the devil than that."



Upon a discussion of the subject with him, it appeared that he

considered the project distinctly and decidedly dangerous.

I was not convinced, yet I was not willing to try the

experiment in any risky way--that is, in a way that might

cripple the strength and efficiency of the Expedition.

I was about at my wits' end when it occurred to me to try

it on the Latinist.



He was called in.  But he declined, on the plea

of inexperience, diffidence in public, lack of curiosity,

and I didn't know what all.  Another man declined

on account of a cold in the head; thought he ought

to avoid exposure.  Another could not jump well--never

COULD jump well--did not believe he could jump so far

without long and patient practice.  Another was afraid it

was going to rain, and his umbrella had a hole in it.

Everybody had an excuse.  The result was what the reader

has by this time guessed: the most magnificent idea

that was ever conceived had to be abandoned, from sheer

lack of a person with enterprise enough to carry it out.

Yes, I actually had to give that thing up--while doubtless

I should live to see somebody use it and take all the credit from

me.



Well, I had to go overland--there was no other way.

I marched the Expedition down the steep and tedious mule-path

and took up as good a position as I could upon the middle

of the glacier--because Baedeker said the middle part

travels the fastest.  As a measure of economy, however,

I put some of the heavier baggage on the shoreward parts,

to go as slow freight.



I waited and waited, but the glacier did not move.

Night was coming on, the darkness began to gather--still we

did not budge.  It occurred to me then, that there might

be a time-table in Baedeker; it would be well to find out

the hours of starting.  I called for the book--it could not

be found.  Bradshaw would certainly contain a time-table;

but no Bradshaw could be found.



Very well, I must make the best of the situation.  So I

pitched the tents, picketed the animals, milked the cows,

had supper, paregoricked the men, established the watch,

and went to bed--with orders to call me as soon as we came

in sight of Zermatt.



I awoke about half past ten next morning, and looked around.

We hadn't budged a peg! At first I could not understand it;

then it occurred to me that the old thing must be aground.

So I cut down some trees and rigged a spar on the starboard

and another on the port side, and fooled away upward of

three hours trying to spar her off.  But it was no use.

She was half a mile wide and fifteen or twenty miles long,

and there was no telling just whereabouts she WAS aground.

The men began to show uneasiness, too, and presently they

came flying to me with ashy faces, saying she had sprung

a leak.



Nothing but my cool behavior at this critical time saved us

from another panic.  I order them to show me the place.

They led me to a spot where a huge boulder lay in a deep

pool of clear and brilliant water.  It did look like

a pretty bad leak, but I kept that to myself.  I made

a pump and set the men to work to pump out the glacier.

We made a success of it.  I perceived, then, that it was not

a leak at all.  This boulder had descended from a precipice

and stopped on the ice in the middle of the glacier,

and the sun had warmed it up, every day, and consequently

it had melted its way deeper and deeper into the ice,

until at last it reposed, as we had found it, in a deep

pool of the clearest and coldest water.



Presently Baedeker was found again, and I hunted eagerly

for the time-table. There was none.  The book simply said

the glacier was moving all the time.  This was satisfactory,

so I shut up the book and chose a good position to view

the scenery as we passed along.  I stood there some time

enjoying the trip, but at last it occurred to me that we did

not seem to be gaining any on the scenery.  I said to myself,

"This confounded old thing's aground again, sure,"--and

opened Baedeker to see if I could run across any remedy

for these annoying interruptions.  I soon found a sentence

which threw a dazzling light upon the matter.  It said,

"The Gorner Glacier travels at an average rate of a little

less than an inch a day." I have seldom felt so outraged.

I have seldom had my confidence so wantonly betrayed.

I made a small calculation: One inch a day, say thirty

feet a year; estimated distance to Zermatt, three and

one-eighteenth miles.  Time required to go by glacier,

A LITTLE OVER FIVE HUNDRED YEARS! I said to myself, "I can

WALK it quicker--and before I will patronize such a fraud

as this, I will do it."



When I revealed to Harris the fact that the passenger part

of this glacier--the central part--the lightning-express part,

so to speak--was not due in Zermatt till the summer

of 2378, and that the baggage, coming along the slow edge,

would not arrive until some generations later, he burst

out with:



"That is European management, all over! An inch a day--think

of that! Five hundred years to go a trifle over three miles!

But I am not a bit surprised.  It's a Catholic glacier.

You can tell by the look of it.  And the management."



I said, no, I believed nothing but the extreme end of it

was in a Catholic canton.



"Well, then, it's a government glacier," said Harris.

"It's all the same.  Over here the government runs

everything--so everything's slow; slow, and ill-managed. But

with us, everything's done by private enterprise--and then

there ain't much lolling around, you can depend on it.

I wish Tom Scott could get his hands on this torpid old

slab once--you'd see it take a different gait from this."



I said I was sure he would increase the speed, if there

was trade enough to justify it.



"He'd MAKE trade," said Harris.  "That's the difference

between governments and individuals.  Governments don't care,

individuals do.  Tom Scott would take all the trade;

in two years Gorner stock would go to two hundred,

and inside of two more you would see all the other glaciers

under the hammer for taxes." After a reflective pause,

Harris added, "A little less than an inch a day; a little

less than an INCH, mind you.  Well, I'm losing my reverence

for glaciers."



I was feeling much the same way myself.  I have traveled

by canal-boat, ox-wagon, raft, and by the Ephesus and

Smyrna railway; but when it comes down to good solid

honest slow motion, I bet my money on the glacier.

As a means of passenger transportation, I consider

the glacier a failure; but as a vehicle of slow freight,

I think she fills the bill.  In the matter of putting

the fine shades on that line of business, I judge she

could teach the Germans something.



I ordered the men to break camp and prepare for the land

journey to Zermatt.  At this moment a most interesting

find was made; a dark object, bedded in the glacial ice,

was cut out with the ice-axes, and it proved to be a piece

of the undressed skin of some animal--a hair trunk, perhaps;

but a close inspection disabled the hair-trunk theory,

and further discussion and examination exploded it

entirely--that is, in the opinion of all the scientists

except the one who had advanced it.  This one clung

to his theory with affectionate fidelity characteristic

of originators of scientific theories, and afterward won

many of the first scientists of the age to his view,

by a very able pamphlet which he wrote, entitled, "Evidences

going to show that the hair trunk, in a wild state,

belonged to the early glacial period, and roamed the wastes

of chaos in the company with the cave-bear, primeval man,

and the other Ooelitics of the Old Silurian family."



Each of our scientists had a theory of his own, and put

forward an animal of his own as a candidate for the skin.

I sided with the geologist of the Expedition in the

belief that this patch of skin had once helped to cover

a Siberian elephant, in some old forgotten age--but we

divided there, the geologist believing that this discovery

proved that Siberia had formerly been located where

Switzerland is now, whereas I held the opinion that it

merely proved that the primeval Swiss was not the dull

savage he is represented to have been, but was a being

of high intellectual development, who liked to go to the

menagerie.



We arrived that evening, after many hardships and adventures,

in some fields close to the great ice-arch where the mad

Visp boils and surges out from under the foot of the

great Gorner Glacier, and here we camped, our perils over

and our magnificent undertaking successfully completed.

We marched into Zermatt the next day, and were received

with the most lavish honors and applause.  A document,

signed and sealed by the authorities, was given to me

which established and endorsed the fact that I had made

the ascent of the Riffelberg.  This I wear around my neck,

and it will be buried with me when I am no more.







CHAPTER XL

[Piteous Relics at Chamonix]



I am not so ignorant about glacial movement, now, as I

was when I took passage on the Gorner Glacier.

I have "read up" since.  I am aware that these vast

bodies of ice do not travel at the same rate of speed;

while the Gorner Glacier makes less than an inch a day,

the Unter-Aar Glacier makes as much as eight; and still

other glaciers are said to go twelve, sixteen, and even

twenty inches a day.  One writer says that the slowest

glacier travels twenty-give feet a year, and the fastest

four hundred.



What is a glacier? It is easy to say it looks like a

frozen river which occupies the bed of a winding gorge

or gully between mountains.  But that gives no notion

of its vastness.  For it is sometimes six hundred

feet thick, and we are not accustomed to rivers six hundred

feet deep; no, our rivers are six feet, twenty feet,

and sometimes fifty feet deep; we are not quite able

to grasp so large a fact as an ice-river six hundred feet deep.



The glacier's surface is not smooth and level, but has

deep swales and swelling elevations, and sometimes has

the look of a tossing sea whose turbulent billows were

frozen hard in the instant of their most violent motion;

the glacier's surface is not a flawless mass, but is a river

with cracks or crevices, some narrow, some gaping wide.

Many a man, the victim of a slip or a misstep, has plunged

down on of these and met his death.  Men have been

fished out of them alive; but it was when they did not

go to a great depth; the cold of the great depths would

quickly stupefy a man, whether he was hurt or unhurt.

These cracks do not go straight down; one can seldom see

more than twenty to forty feet down them; consequently men

who have disappeared in them have been sought for,

in the hope that they had stopped within helping distance,

whereas their case, in most instances, had really been

hopeless from the beginning.



In 1864 a party of tourists was descending Mont Blanc,

and while picking their way over one of the mighty glaciers

of that lofty region, roped together, as was proper,

a young porter disengaged himself from the line and

started across an ice-bridge which spanned a crevice.

It broke under him with a crash, and he disappeared.

The others could not see how deep he had gone, so it might

be worthwhile to try and rescue him.  A brave young guide

named Michel Payot volunteered.



Two ropes were made fast to his leather belt and he bore

the end of a third one in his hand to tie to the victim

in case he found him.  He was lowered into the crevice,

he descended deeper and deeper between the clear blue

walls of solid ice, he approached a bend in the crack

and disappeared under it.  Down, and still down, he went,

into this profound grave; when he had reached a depth

of eighty feet he passed under another bend in the crack,

and thence descended eighty feet lower, as between

perpendicular precipices.  Arrived at this stage of one

hundred and sixty feet below the surface of the glacier,

he peered through the twilight dimness and perceived

that the chasm took another turn and stretched away at

a steep slant to unknown deeps, for its course was lost

in darkness.  What a place that was to be in--especially

if that leather belt should break! The compression

of the belt threatened to suffocate the intrepid fellow;

he called to his friends to draw him up, but could not make

them hear.  They still lowered him, deeper and deeper.

Then he jerked his third cord as vigorously as he could;

his friends understood, and dragged him out of those icy jaws

of death.



Then they attached a bottle to a cord and sent it down

two hundred feet, but it found no bottom.  It came up

covered with congelations--evidence enough that even if

the poor porter reached the bottom with unbroken bones,

a swift death from cold was sure, anyway.



A glacier is a stupendous, ever-progressing, resistless plow.

It pushes ahead of its masses of boulders which are

packed together, and they stretch across the gorge,

right in front of it, like a long grave or a long,

sharp roof.  This is called a moraine.  It also shoves

out a moraine along each side of its course.



Imposing as the modern glaciers are, they are not so

huge as were some that once existed.  For instance,

Mr. Whymper says:



"At some very remote period the Valley of Aosta was occupied

by a vast glacier, which flowed down its entire length from

Mont Blanc to the plain of Piedmont, remained stationary,

or nearly so, at its mouth for many centuries, and deposited

there enormous masses of debris.  The length of this

glacier exceeded EIGHTY MILES, and it drained a basin

twenty-five to thirty-five miles across, bounded by the

highest mountains in the Alps.  The great peaks rose

several thousand feet above the glaciers, and then, as now,

shattered by sun and frost, poured down their showers of

rocks and stones, in witness of which there are the immense

piles of angular fragments that constitute the moraines of Ivrea.



"The moraines around Ivrea are of extraordinary dimensions.

That which was on the left bank of the glacier is

about THIRTEEN MILES long, and in some places rises

to a height of TWO THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FEET

above the floor of the valley! The terminal moraines

(those which are pushed in front of the glaciers)

cover something like twenty square miles of country.

At the mouth of the Valley of Aosta, the thickness of

the glacier must have been at least TWO THOUSAND feet,

and its width, at that part, FIVE MILES AND A QUARTER."



It is not easy to get at a comprehension of a mass of ice

like that.  If one could cleave off the butt end of such

a glacier--an oblong block two or three miles wide

by five and a quarter long and two thousand feet thick

--he could completely hide the city of New York under it,

and Trinity steeple would only stick up into it relatively

as far as a shingle-nail would stick up into the bottom

of a Saratoga trunk.



"The boulders from Mont Blanc, upon the plain below Ivrea,

assure us that the glacier which transported them existed

for a prodigious length of time.  Their present distance from

the cliffs from which they were derived is about 420,000 feet,

and if we assume that they traveled at the rate of 400 feet

per annum, their journey must have occupied them no less

than 1,055 years! In all probability they did not travel so

fast."



Glaciers are sometimes hurried out of their characteristic

snail-pace. A marvelous spectacle is presented then.

Mr. Whymper refers to a case which occurred in Iceland

in 1721:



"It seems that in the neighborhood of the mountain Kotlugja,

large bodies of water formed underneath, or within

the glaciers (either on account of the interior heat of

the earth, or from other causes), and at length acquired

irresistible power, tore the glaciers from their mooring on

the land, and swept them over every obstacle into the sea.

Prodigious masses of ice were thus borne for a distance

of about ten miles over land in the space of a few hours;

and their bulk was so enormous that they covered the sea

for seven miles from the shore, and remained aground

in six hundred feet of water! The denudation of the land

was upon a grand scale.  All superficial accumulations were

swept away, and the bedrock was exposed.  It was described,

in graphic language, how all irregularities and depressions

were obliterated, and a smooth surface of several miles'

area laid bare, and that this area had the appearance

of having been PLANED BY A PLANE."



The account translated from the Icelandic says that the

mountainlike ruins of this majestic glacier so covered

the sea that as far as the eye could reach no open water

was discoverable, even from the highest peaks.  A monster

wall or barrier of ice was built across a considerable

stretch of land, too, by this strange irruption:



"One can form some idea of the altitude of this barrier

of ice when it is mentioned that from Hofdabrekka farm,

which lies high up on a fjeld, one could not see

Hjorleifshofdi opposite, which is a fell six hundred and

forty feet in height; but in order to do so had to clamber

up a mountain slope east of Hofdabrekka twelve hundred feet

high."



These things will help the reader to understand why it is

that a man who keeps company with glaciers comes to feel

tolerably insignificant by and by.  The Alps and the glaciers

together are able to take every bit of conceit out of a man

and reduce his self-importance to zero if he will only

remain within the influence of their sublime presence long

enough to give it a fair and reasonable chance to do its work.



The Alpine glaciers move--that is granted, now, by everybody.

But there was a time when people scoffed at the idea;

they said you might as well expect leagues of solid rock

to crawl along the ground as expect leagues of ice to do it.

But proof after proof as furnished, and the finally the

world had to believe.



The wise men not only said the glacier moved, but they

timed its movement.  They ciphered out a glacier's gait,

and then said confidently that it would travel just

so far in so many years.  There is record of a striking

and curious example of the accuracy which may be attained

in these reckonings.



In 1820 the ascent of Mont Blanc was attempted by a Russian

and two Englishmen, with seven guides.  They had reached

a prodigious altitude, and were approaching the summit,

when an avalanche swept several of the party down a

sharp slope of two hundred feet and hurled five of them

(all guides) into one of the crevices of a glacier.

The life of one of the five was saved by a long barometer

which was strapped to his back--it bridged the crevice

and suspended him until help came.  The alpenstock

or baton of another saved its owner in a similar way.

Three men were lost--Pierre Balmat, Pierre Carrier,

and Auguste Tairraz.  They had been hurled down into the

fathomless great deeps of the crevice.



Dr. Forbes, the English geologist, had made frequent visits

to the Mont Blanc region, and had given much attention

to the disputed question of the movement of glaciers.

During one of these visits he completed his estimates

of the rate of movement of the glacier which had swallowed

up the three guides, and uttered the prediction that the

glacier would deliver up its dead at the foot of the

mountain thirty-five years from the time of the accident,

or possibly forty.



A dull, slow journey--a movement imperceptible to any eye

--but it was proceeding, nevertheless, and without cessation.

It was a journey which a rolling stone would make in a

few seconds--the lofty point of departure was visible

from the village below in the valley.



The prediction cut curiously close to the truth;

forty-one years after the catastrophe, the remains

were cast forth at the foot of the glacier.



I find an interesting account of the matter in the

HISTOIRE DU MONT BLANC, by Stephen d'Arve. I will

condense this account, as follows:



On the 12th of August, 1861, at the hour of the close of mass,

a guide arrived out of breath at the mairie of Chamonix,

and bearing on his shoulders a very lugubrious burden.

It was a sack filled with human remains which he had gathered

from the orifice of a crevice in the Glacier des Bossons.

He conjectured that these were remains of the victims

of the catastrophe of 1820, and a minute inquest,

immediately instituted by the local authorities,

soon demonstrated the correctness of his supposition.

The contents of the sack were spread upon a long table,

and officially inventoried, as follows:



Portions of three human skulls.  Several tufts of black and

blonde hair.  A human jaw, furnished with fine white teeth.

A forearm and hand, all the fingers of the latter intact.

The flesh was white and fresh, and both the arm and hand

preserved a degree of flexibility in the articulations.



The ring-finger had suffered a slight abrasion, and the

stain of the blood was still visible and unchanged after

forty-one years.  A left foot, the flesh white and fresh.



Along with these fragments were portions of waistcoats, hats,

hobnailed shoes, and other clothing; a wing of a pigeon,

with black feathers; a fragment of an alpenstock;

a tin lantern; and lastly, a boiled leg of mutton,

the only flesh among all the remains that exhaled an

unpleasant odor.  The guide said that the mutton had no

odor when he took it from the glacier; an hour's exposure

to the sun had already begun the work of decomposition upon it.



Persons were called for, to identify these poor pathetic relics,

and a touching scene ensured.  Two men were still living

who had witnessed the grim catastrophe of nearly half

a century before--Marie Couttet (saved by his baton)

and Julien Davouassoux (saved by the barometer). These aged

men entered and approached the table.  Davouassoux, more than

eighty years old, contemplated the mournful remains mutely

and with a vacant eye, for his intelligence and his memory

were torpid with age; but Couttet's faculties were still

perfect at seventy-two, and he exhibited strong emotion.  He

said:



"Pierre Balmat was fair; he wore a straw hat.  This bit of skull,

with the tuft of blond hair, was his; this is his hat.

Pierre Carrier was very dark; this skull was his, and this

felt hat.  This is Balmat's hand, I remember it so well!"

and the old man bent down and kissed it reverently,

then closed his fingers upon it in an affectionate grasp,

crying out, "I could never have dared to believe that

before quitting this world it would be granted me to

press once more the hand of one of those brave comrades,

the hand of my good friend Balmat."



There is something weirdly pathetic about the picture

of that white-haired veteran greeting with his loving

handshake this friend who had been dead forty years.

When these hands had met last, they were alike in the

softness and freshness of youth; now, one was brown and

wrinkled and horny with age, while the other was still

as young and fair and blemishless as if those forty years

had come and gone in a single moment, leaving no mark

of their passage.  Time had gone on, in the one case;

it had stood still in the other.  A man who has not seen

a friend for a generation, keeps him in mind always as he

saw him last, and is somehow surprised, and is also shocked,

to see the aging change the years have wrought when he

sees him again.  Marie Couttet's experience, in finding

his friend's hand unaltered from the image of it which he

had carried in his memory for forty years, is an experience

which stands alone in the history of man, perhaps.



Couttet identified other relics:



"This hat belonged to Auguste Tairraz.  He carried

the cage of pigeons which we proposed to set free upon

the summit.  Here is the wing of one of those pigeons.

And here is the fragment of my broken baton; it was by

grace of that baton that my life was saved.  Who could

have told me that I should one day have the satisfaction

to look again upon this bit of wood that supported me above

the grave that swallowed up my unfortunate companions!"



No portions of the body of Tairraz, other than a piece

of the skull, had been found.  A diligent search was made,

but without result.  However, another search was

instituted a year later, and this had better success.

Many fragments of clothing which had belonged to the lost

guides were discovered; also, part of a lantern, and a

green veil with blood-stains on it.  But the interesting

feature was this:



One of the searchers came suddenly upon a sleeved arm

projecting from a crevice in the ice-wall, with the hand

outstretched as if offering greeting! "The nails of this white

hand were still rosy, and the pose of the extended fingers

seemed to express an eloquent welcome to the long-lost light of

day."



The hand and arm were alone; there was no trunk.

After being removed from the ice the flesh-tints quickly

faded out and the rosy nails took on the alabaster

hue of death.  This was the third RIGHT hand found;

therefore, all three of the lost men were accounted for,

beyond cavil or question.



Dr. Hamel was the Russian gentleman of the party which

made the ascent at the time of the famous disaster.

He left Chamonix as soon as he conveniently could after

the descent; and as he had shown a chilly indifference

about the calamity, and offered neither sympathy nor

assistance to the widows and orphans, he carried with

him the cordial execrations of the whole community.

Four months before the first remains were found,

a Chamonix guide named Balmat--a relative of one of

the lost men--was in London, and one day encountered

a hale old gentleman in the British Museum, who said:



"I overheard your name.  Are you from Chamonix,

Monsieur Balmat?"



"Yes, sir."



"Haven't they found the bodies of my three guides,

yet? I am Dr. Hamel."



"Alas, no, monsieur."



"Well, you'll find them, sooner or later."



"Yes, it is the opinion of Dr. Forbes and Mr. Tyndall,

that the glacier will sooner or later restore to us the

remains of the unfortunate victims."



"Without a doubt, without a doubt.  And it will be a great

thing for Chamonix, in the matter of attracting tourists.

You can get up a museum with those remains that will draw!"



This savage idea has not improved the odor of Dr. Hamel's

name in Chamonix by any means.  But after all, the man

was sound on human nature.  His idea was conveyed

to the public officials of Chamonix, and they gravely

discussed it around the official council-table. They

were only prevented from carrying it into execution by

the determined opposition of the friends and descendants

of the lost guides, who insisted on giving the remains

Christian burial, and succeeded in their purpose.



A close watch had to be kept upon all the poor remnants

and fragments, to prevent embezzlement.  A few accessory

odds and ends were sold.  Rags and scraps of the coarse

clothing were parted with at the rate equal to about

twenty dollars a yard; a piece of a lantern and one or

two other trifles brought nearly their weight in gold;

and an Englishman offered a pound sterling for a single

breeches-button.







CHAPTER XLI

[The Fearful Disaster of 1865]



One of the most memorable of all the Alpine catastrophes

was that of July, 1865, on the Matterhorn--already

sighted referred to, a few pages back.  The details

of it are scarcely known in America.  To the vast

majority of readers they are not known at all.

Mr. Whymper's account is the only authentic one.

I will import the chief portion of it into this book,

partly because of its intrinsic interest, and partly

because it gives such a vivid idea of what the perilous

pastime of Alp-climbing is.  This was Mr. Whymper's

NINTH attempt during a series of years, to vanquish

that steep and stubborn pillar or rock; it succeeded,

the other eight were failures.  No man had ever accomplished

the ascent before, though the attempts had been numerous.



MR. WHYMPER'S NARRATIVE



We started from Zermatt on the 13th of July, at half

past five, on a brilliant and perfectly cloudless morning.

We were eight in number--Croz (guide), old Peter

Taugwalder (guide) and his two sons; Lord F. Douglas,

Mr. Hadow, Rev. Mr. Hudson, and I. To insure steady

motion, one tourist and one native walked together.

The youngest Taugwalder fell to my share.  The wine-bags

also fell to my lot to carry, and throughout the day,

after each drink, I replenished them secretly with water,

so that at the next halt they were found fuller than

before! This was considered a good omen, and little short

of miraculous.



On the first day we did not intend to ascend to any

great height, and we mounted, accordingly, very leisurely.

Before twelve o'clock we had found a good position

for the tent, at a height of eleven thousand feet.

We passed the remaining hours of daylight--some basking

in the sunshine, some sketching, some collecting;

Hudson made tea, I coffee, and at length we retired,

each one to his blanket bag.



We assembled together before dawn on the 14th

and started directly it was light enough to move.

One of the young Taugwalders returned to Zermatt.

In a few minutes we turned the rib which had intercepted

the view of the eastern face from our tent platform.

The whole of this great slope was now revealed, rising for

three thousand feet like a huge natural staircase.

Some parts were more, and others were less easy, but we

were not once brought to a halt by any serious impediment,

for when an obstruction was met in front it could always

be turned to the right or to the left.  For the greater part

of the way there was no occasion, indeed, for the rope,

and sometimes Hudson led, sometimes myself.  At six-twenty we

had attained a height of twelve thousand eight hundred feet,

and halted for half an hour; we then continued the ascent

without a break until nine-fifty-five, when we stopped

for fifty minutes, at a height of fourteen thousand feet.



We had now arrived at the foot of that part which, seen from

the Riffelberg, seems perpendicular or overhanging.

We could no longer continue on the eastern side.  For a little

distance we ascended by snow upon the ARE^TE--that is,

the ridge--then turned over to the right, or northern side.

The work became difficult, and required caution.  In some places

there was little to hold; the general slope of the mountain

was LESS than forty degrees, and snow had accumulated in,

and had filled up, the interstices of the rock-face, leaving

only occasional fragments projecting here and there.

These were at times covered with a thin film of ice.

It was a place which any fair mountaineer might pass

in safety.  We bore away nearly horizontally for about four

hundred feet, then ascended directly toward the summit

for about sixty feet, then doubled back to the ridge

which descends toward Zermatt.  A long stride round

a rather awkward corner brought us to snow once more.

That last doubt vanished! The Matterhorn was ours! Nothing

but two hundred feet of easy snow remained to be surmounted.



The higher we rose, the more intense became the excitement.

The slope eased off, at length we could be detached,

and Croz and I, dashed away, ran a neck-and-neck race,

which ended in a dead heat.  At 1:40 P.M., the world was at

our feet, and the Matterhorn was conquered!



The others arrived.  Croz now took the tent-pole, and

planted it in the highest snow.  "Yes," we said, "there is

the flag-staff, but where is the flag?" "Here it is,"

he answered, pulling off his blouse and fixing it to the stick.

It made a poor flag, and there was no wind to float it out,

yet it was seen all around.  They saw it at Zermatt--at

the Riffel--in the Val Tournanche... .



We remained on the summit for one hour--



One crowded hour of glorious life.



It passed away too quickly, and we began to prepare

for the descent.



Hudson and I consulted as to the best and safest arrangement

of the party.  We agreed that it was best for Croz

to go first, and Hadow second; Hudson, who was almost

equal to a guide in sureness of foot, wished to be third;

Lord Douglas was placed next, and old Peter, the strongest

of the remainder, after him.  I suggested to Hudson

that we should attach a rope to the rocks on our arrival

at the difficult bit, and hold it as we descended,

as an additional protection.  He approved the idea,

but it was not definitely decided that it should be done.

The party was being arranged in the above order while I

was sketching the summit, and they had finished,

and were waiting for me to be tied in line, when some one

remembered that our names had not been left in a bottle.

They requested me to write them down, and moved off

while it was being done.



A few minutes afterward I tied myself to young Peter,

ran down after the others, and caught them just as they

were commencing the descent of the difficult part.

Great care was being taken.  Only one man was moving at a time;

when he was firmly planted the next advanced, and so on.

They had not, however, attached the additional rope

to rocks, and nothing was said about it.  The suggestion

was not made for my own sake, and I am not sure that it

ever occurred to me again.  For some little distance we

two followed the others, detached from them, and should

have continued so had not Lord Douglas asked me, about 3

P.M., to tie on to old Peter, as he feared, he said,

that Taugwalder would not be able to hold his ground if a

slip occurred.



A few minutes later, a sharp-eyed lad ran into the Monte

Rosa Hotel, at Zermatt, saying that he had seen an avalanche

fall from the summit of the Matterhorn onto the Matterhorn

glacier.  The boy was reproved for telling idle stories;

he was right, nevertheless, and this was what he saw.



Michel Croz had laid aside his ax, and in order to give

Mr. Hadow greater security, was absolutely taking

hold of his legs, and putting his feet, one by one,

into their proper positions.  As far as I know, no one

was actually descending.  I cannot speak with certainty,

because the two leading men were partially hidden

from my sight by an intervening mass of rock, but it

is my belief, from the movements of their shoulders,

that Croz, having done as I said, was in the act

of turning round to go down a step or two himself;

at this moment Mr. Hadow slipped, fell against him,

and knocked him over.  I heard one startled exclamation

from Croz, then saw him and Mr. Hadow flying downward;

in another moment Hudson was dragged from his steps,

and Lord Douglas immediately after him.  All this was the

work of a moment.  Immediately we heard Croz's exclamation,

old Peter and I planted ourselves as firmly as the rocks

would permit; the rope was taut between us, and the jerk

came on us both as on one man.  We held; but the rope

broke midway between Taugwalder and Lord Francis Douglas.

For a few seconds we saw our unfortunate companions sliding

downward on their backs, and spreading out their hands,

endeavoring to save themselves.  They passed from our

sight uninjured, disappeared one by one, and fell from the

precipice to precipice onto the Matterhorn glacier below,

a distance of nearly four thousand feet in height.

From the moment the rope broke it was impossible to help them.

So perished our comrades!



For more than two hours afterward I thought almost every

moment that the next would be my last; for the Taugwalders,

utterly unnerved, were not only incapable of giving assistance,

but were in such a state that a slip might have been

expected from them at any moment.  After a time we were able

to do that which should have been done at first, and fixed

rope to firm rocks, in addition to being tied together.

These ropes were cut from time to time, and were left behind.

Even with their assurance the men were afraid to proceed,

and several times old Peter turned, with ashy face

and faltering limbs, and said, with terrible emphasis,

"I CANNOT!"



About 6 P.M., we arrived at the snow upon the ridge

descending toward Zermatt, and all peril was over.

We frequently looked, but in vain, for traces of our

unfortunate companions; we bent over the ridge and cried

to them, but no sound returned.  Convinced at last that

they were neither within sight nor hearing, we ceased

from our useless efforts; and, too cast down for speech,

silently gathered up our things, and the little effects

of those who were lost, and then completed the descent.



----------



Such is Mr. Whymper's graphic and thrilling narrative.

Zermatt gossip darkly hints that the elder Taugwalder

cut the rope, when the accident occurred, in order

to preserve himself from being dragged into the abyss;

but Mr. Whymper says that the ends of the rope showed

no evidence of cutting, but only of breaking.  He adds

that if Taugwalder had had the disposition to cut the rope,

he would not have had time to do it, the accident was so

sudden and unexpected.



Lord Douglas' body has never been found.  It probably

lodged upon some inaccessible shelf in the face of the

mighty precipice.  Lord Douglas was a youth of nineteen.

The three other victims fell nearly four thousand feet,

and their bodies lay together upon the glacier when found

by Mr. Whymper and the other searchers the next morning.

Their graves are beside the little church in Zermatt.







CHAPTER XLII

[Chillon has a Nice, Roomy Dungeon]



Switzerland is simply a large, humpy, solid rock,

with a thin skin of grass stretched over it.  Consequently,

they do not dig graves, they blast them out with power

and fuse.  They cannot afford to have large graveyards,

the grass skin is too circumscribed and too valuable.

It is all required for the support of the living.



The graveyard in Zermatt occupies only about one-eighth

of an acre.  The graves are sunk in the living rock, and are

very permanent; but occupation of them is only temporary;

the occupant can only stay till his grave is needed

by a later subject, he is removed, then, for they do not

bury one body on top of another.  As I understand it,

a family owns a grave, just as it owns a house.  A man dies

and leaves his house to his son--and at the same time,

this dead father succeeds to his own father's grave.

He moves out of the house and into the grave, and his

predecessor moves out of the grave and into the cellar

of the chapel.  I saw a black box lying in the churchyard,

with skull and cross-bones painted on it, and was told that

this was used in transferring remains to the cellar.



In that cellar the bones and skulls of several hundred of

former citizens were compactly corded up.  They made a pile

eighteen feet long, seven feet high, and eight feet wide.

I was told that in some of the receptacles of this kind

in the Swiss villages, the skulls were all marked,

and if a man wished to find the skulls of his ancestors

for several generations back, he could do it by these marks,

preserved in the family records.



An English gentleman who had lived some years in this region,

said it was the cradle of compulsory education.

But he said that the English idea that compulsory

education would reduce bastardy and intemperance was an

error--it has not that effect.  He said there was more

seduction in the Protestant than in the Catholic cantons,

because the confessional protected the girls.  I wonder

why it doesn't protect married women in France and Spain?



This gentleman said that among the poorer peasants in the Valais,

it was common for the brothers in a family to cast lots

to determine which of them should have the coveted privilege

of marrying, and his brethren--doomed bachelors--heroically

banded themselves together to help support the new family.



We left Zermatt in a wagon--and in a rain-storm, too

--for St. Nicholas about ten o'clock one morning.

Again we passed between those grass-clad prodigious cliffs,

specked with wee dwellings peeping over at us from

velvety green walls ten and twelve hundred feet high.

It did not seem possible that the imaginary chamois

even could climb those precipices.  Lovers on opposite

cliffs probably kiss through a spy-glass, and correspond

with a rifle.



In Switzerland the farmer's plow is a wide shovel,

which scrapes up and turns over the thin earthy skin of his

native rock--and there the man of the plow is a hero.

Now here, by our St. Nicholas road, was a grave, and it

had a tragic story.  A plowman was skinning his farm

one morning--not the steepest part of it, but still

a steep part--that is, he was not skinning the front

of his farm, but the roof of it, near the eaves--when he

absent-mindedly let go of the plow-handles to moisten

his hands, in the usual way; he lost his balance and fell

out of his farm backward; poor fellow, he never touched

anything till he struck bottom, fifteen hundred feet below.

[1] We throw a halo of heroism around the life of the

soldier and the sailor, because of the deadly dangers they

are facing all the time.  But we are not used to looking

upon farming as a heroic occupation.  This is because we

have not lived in Switzerland.



1.  This was on a Sunday.--M.T.



From St. Nicholas we struck out for Visp--or Vispach--on foot.

The rain-storms had been at work during several days,

and had done a deal of damage in Switzerland and Savoy.

We came to one place where a stream had changed its

course and plunged down a mountain in a new place,

sweeping everything before it.  Two poor but precious farms

by the roadside were ruined.  One was washed clear away,

and the bed-rock exposed; the other was buried out of sight

under a tumbled chaos of rocks, gravel, mud, and rubbish.

The resistless might of water was well exemplified.

Some saplings which had stood in the way were bent to the ground,

stripped clean of their bark, and buried under rocky debris.

The road had been swept away, too.



In another place, where the road was high up on the mountain's

face, and its outside edge protected by flimsy masonry,

we frequently came across spots where this masonry had

carved off and left dangerous gaps for mules to get over;

and with still more frequency we found the masonry

slightly crumbled, and marked by mule-hoofs, thus showing

that there had been danger of an accident to somebody.

When at last we came to a badly ruptured bit of masonry,

with hoof-prints evidencing a desperate struggle

to regain the lost foothold, I looked quite hopefully

over the dizzy precipice.  But there was nobody down there.



They take exceedingly good care of their rivers in Switzerland

and other portions of Europe.  They wall up both banks

with slanting solid stone masonry--so that from end

to end of these rivers the banks look like the wharves

at St. Louis and other towns on the Mississippi River.



It was during this walk from St. Nicholas, in the shadow

of the majestic Alps, that we came across some little

children amusing themselves in what seemed, at first,

a most odd and original way--but it wasn't; it was in

simply a natural and characteristic way.  They were roped

together with a string, they had mimic alpenstocks and

ice-axes, and were climbing a meek and lowly manure-pile

with a most blood-curdling amount of care and caution.

The "guide" at the head of the line cut imaginary steps,

in a laborious and painstaking way, and not a monkey

budged till the step above was vacated.  If we had waited

we should have witnessed an imaginary accident, no doubt;

and we should have heard the intrepid band hurrah when they

made the summit and looked around upon the "magnificent view,"

and seen them throw themselves down in exhausted attitudes

for a rest in that commanding situation.



In Nevada I used to see the children play at silver-mining.

Of course, the great thing was an accident in a mine,

and there were two "star" parts; that of the man

who fell down the mimic shaft, and that of the daring

hero who was lowered into the depths to bring him up.

I knew one small chap who always insisted on playing

BOTH of these parts--and he carried his point.

He would tumble into the shaft and die, and then come

to the surface and go back after his own remains.



It is the smartest boy that gets the hero part everywhere;

he is head guide in Switzerland, head miner in Nevada,

head bull-fighter in Spain, etc.; but I knew a preacher's son,

seven years old, who once selected a part for himself compared

to which those just mentioned are tame and unimpressive.

Jimmy's father stopped him from driving imaginary

horse-cars one Sunday--stopped him from playing captain

of an imaginary steamboat next Sunday--stopped him

from leading an imaginary army to battle the following

Sunday--and so on.  Finally the little fellow said:



"I've tried everything, and they won't any of them do.

What CAN I play?"



"I hardly know, Jimmy; but you MUST play only things

that are suitable to the Sabbath-day."



Next Sunday the preacher stepped softly to a back-room

door to see if the children were rightly employed.

He peeped in.  A chair occupied the middle of the room,

and on the back of it hung Jimmy's cap; one of his little

sisters took the cap down, nibbled at it, then passed it

to another small sister and said, "Eat of this fruit,

for it is good." The Reverend took in the situation--alas,

they were playing the Expulsion from Eden! Yet he found

one little crumb of comfort.  He said to himself, "For once

Jimmy has yielded the chief role--I have been wronging him,

I did not believe there was so much modesty in him;

I should have expected him to be either Adam or Eve."

This crumb of comfort lasted but a very little while;

he glanced around and discovered Jimmy standing in an

imposing attitude in a corner, with a dark and deadly frown

on his face.  What that meant was very plain--HE WAS

IMPERSONATING THE DEITY! Think of the guileless sublimity of

that idea.



We reached Vispach at 8 P.M., only about seven hours

out from St. Nicholas.  So we must have made fully

a mile and a half an hour, and it was all downhill,

too, and very muddy at that.  We stayed all night at

the Ho^tel de Soleil; I remember it because the landlady,

the portier, the waitress, and the chambermaid were not

separate persons, but were all contained in one neat and

chipper suit of spotless muslin, and she was the prettiest

young creature I saw in all that region.  She was the

landlord's daughter.  And I remember that the only native

match to her I saw in all Europe was the young daughter

of the landlord of a village inn in the Black Forest.

Why don't more people in Europe marry and keep hotel?



Next morning we left with a family of English friends

and went by train to Brevet, and thence by boat across

the lake to Ouchy (Lausanne).



Ouchy is memorable to me, not on account of its beautiful

situation and lovely surroundings--although these would

make it stick long in one's memory--but as the place

where _I_ caught the London TIMES dropping into humor.

It was NOT aware of it, though.  It did not do it on purpose.

An English friend called my attention to this lapse,

and cut out the reprehensible paragraph for me.  Think of

encountering a grin like this on the face of that grim

journal:



ERRATUM.--We are requested by Reuter's Telegram Company

to correct an erroneous announcement made in their Brisbane

telegram of the 2d inst., published in our impression of the 5th

inst., stating that "Lady Kennedy had given birth to twins,

the eldest being a son." The Company explain that the message

they received contained the words "Governor of Queensland,

TWINS FIRST SON." Being, however, subsequently informed

that Sir Arthur Kennedy was unmarried and that there

must be some mistake, a telegraphic repetition was at

once demanded.  It has been received today (11th inst.)

and shows that the words really telegraphed by Reuter's

agent were "Governor Queensland TURNS FIRST SOD,"

alluding to the Maryborough-Gympic Railway in course

of construction.  The words in italics were mutilated by

the telegraph in transmission from Australia, and reaching

the company in the form mentioned above gave rise to the mistake.





I had always had a deep and reverent compassion

for the sufferings of the "prisoner of Chillon,"

whose story Byron had told in such moving verse; so I took

the steamer and made pilgrimage to the dungeons of the

Castle of Chillon, to see the place where poor Bonnivard

endured his dreary captivity three hundred years ago.

I am glad I did that, for it took away some of the pain

I was feeling on the prisoner's account.  His dungeon

was a nice, cool, roomy place, and I cannot see why he

should have been dissatisfied with it.  If he had been

imprisoned in a St. Nicholas private dwelling, where the

fertilizer prevails, and the goat sleeps with the guest,

and the chickens roost on him and the cow comes in and

bothers him when he wants to muse, it would have been

another matter altogether; but he surely could not have

had a very cheerless time of it in that pretty dungeon.

It has romantic window-slits that let in generous bars

of light, and it has tall, noble columns, carved apparently

from the living rock; and what is more, they are written

all over with thousands of names; some of them--like

Byron's and Victor Hugo's--of the first celebrity.

Why didn't he amuse himself reading these names? Then

there are the couriers and tourists--swarms of them every

day--what was to hinder him from having a good time

with them? I think Bonnivard's sufferings have been overrated.



Next, we took the train and went to Martigny, on the way

to Mont Blanc.  Next morning we started, about eight

o'clock, on foot.  We had plenty of company, in the way

of wagon-loads and mule-loads of tourists--and dust.

This scattering procession of travelers was perhaps a

mile long.  The road was uphill--interminable uphill--and

tolerably steep.  The weather was blisteringly hot,

and the man or woman who had to sit on a creeping mule,

or in a crawling wagon, and broil in the beating sun,

was an object to be pitied.  We could dodge among the bushes,

and have the relief of shade, but those people could not.

They paid for a conveyance, and to get their money's worth

they rode.



We went by the way of the Te^te Noir, and after we

reached high ground there was no lack of fine scenery.

In one place the road was tunneled through a shoulder

of the mountain; from there one looked down into a gorge

with a rushing torrent in it, and on every hand was a

charming view of rocky buttresses and wooded heights.

There was a liberal allowance of pretty waterfalls, too,

on the Te^te Noir route.



About half an hour before we reached the village of

Argentie`re a vast dome of snow with the sun blazing on it

drifted into view and framed itself in a strong V-shaped

gateway of the mountains, and we recognized Mont Blanc,

the "monarch of the Alps." With every step, after that,

this stately dome rose higher and higher into the blue sky,

and at last seemed to occupy the zenith.



Some of Mont Blanc's neighbors--bare, light-brown, steeplelike

rocks--were very peculiarly shaped.  Some were whittled

to a sharp point, and slightly bent at the upper end,

like a lady's finger; one monster sugar-loaf resembled

a bishop's hat; it was too steep to hold snow on its sides,

but had some in the division.



While we were still on very high ground, and before

the descent toward Argentie`re began, we looked up

toward a neighboring mountain-top, and saw exquisite

prismatic colors playing about some white clouds which

were so delicate as to almost resemble gossamer webs.

The faint pinks and greens were peculiarly beautiful;

none of the colors were deep, they were the lightest shades.

They were bewitching commingled.  We sat down to study and

enjoy this singular spectacle.  The tints remained during

several minutes--fitting, changing, melting into each other;

paling almost away for a moment, then reflushing--a shifting,

restless, unstable succession of soft opaline gleams,

shimmering over that air film of white cloud, and turning

it into a fabric dainty enough to clothe an angel with.



By and by we perceived what those super-delicate colors,

and their continuous play and movement, reminded us of;

it is what one sees in a soap-bubble that is drifting along,

catching changes of tint from the objects it passes.

A soap-bubble is the most beautiful thing, and the

most exquisite, in nature; that lovely phantom fabric

in the sky was suggestive of a soap-bubble split open,

and spread out in the sun.  I wonder how much it would take

to buy a soap-bubble, if there was only one in the world?

One could buy a hatful of Koh-i-Noors with the same money,

no doubt.



We made the tramp from Martigny to Argentie`re in eight hours.

We beat all the mules and wagons; we didn't usually do that.

We hired a sort of open baggage-wagon for the trip down

the valley to Chamonix, and then devoted an hour to dining.

This gave the driver time to get drunk.  He had a friend

with him, and this friend also had had time to get drunk.



When we drove off, the driver said all the tourists had

arrived and gone by while we were at dinner; "but," said he,

impressively, "be not disturbed by that--remain tranquil--give

yourselves no uneasiness--their dust rises far before us

--rest you tranquil, leave all to me--I am the king of drivers.

Behold!"



Down came his whip, and away we clattered.  I never had such

a shaking up in my life.  The recent flooding rains had

washed the road clear away in places, but we never stopped,

we never slowed down for anything.  We tore right along,

over rocks, rubbish, gullies, open fields--sometimes with

one or two wheels on the ground, but generally with none.

Every now and then that calm, good-natured madman would

bend a majestic look over his shoulder at us and say,

"Ah, you perceive? It is as I have said --I am the

king of drivers." Every time we just missed going

to destruction, he would say, with tranquil happiness,

"Enjoy it, gentlemen, it is very rare, it is very unusual

--it is given to few to ride with the king of drivers

--and observe, it is as I have said, _I_ am he."



He spoke in French, and punctuated with hiccoughs.

His friend was French, too, but spoke in German--using

the same system of punctuation, however.  The friend

called himself the "Captain of Mont Blanc," and wanted us

to make the ascent with him.  He said he had made more

ascents than any other man--forty seven--and his brother

had made thirty-seven. His brother was the best guide

in the world, except himself--but he, yes, observe him

well--he was the "Captain of Mont Blanc"--that title

belonged to none other.



The "king" was as good as his word--he overtook that long

procession of tourists and went by it like a hurricane.

The result was that we got choicer rooms at the hotel

in Chamonix than we should have done if his majesty

had been a slower artist--or rather, if he hadn't most

providentially got drunk before he left Argentie`re.







CHAPTER XLIII

[My Poor Sick Friend Disappointed]



Everybody was out-of-doors; everybody was in the

principal street of the village--not on the sidewalks,

but all over the street; everybody was lounging, loafing,

chatting, waiting, alert, expectant, interested--for it

was train-time. That is to say, it was diligence-time

--the half-dozen big diligences would soon be arriving

from Geneva, and the village was interested, in many ways,

in knowing how many people were coming and what sort of

folk they might be.  It was altogether the livest-looking

street we had seen in any village on the continent.



The hotel was by the side of a booming torrent, whose music

was loud and strong; we could not see this torrent, for it

was dark, now, but one could locate it without a light.

There was a large enclosed yard in front of the hotel,

and this was filled with groups of villagers waiting to see

the diligences arrive, or to hire themselves to excursionists

for the morrow.  A telescope stood in the yard, with its

huge barrel canted up toward the lustrous evening star.

The long porch of the hotel was populous with tourists,

who sat in shawls and wraps under the vast overshadowing

bulk of Mont Blanc, and gossiped or meditated.



Never did a mountain seem so close; its big sides seemed

at one's very elbow, and its majestic dome, and the lofty

cluster of slender minarets that were its neighbors,

seemed to be almost over one's head.  It was night

in the streets, and the lamps were sparkling everywhere;

the broad bases and shoulders of the mountains were in

a deep gloom, but their summits swam in a strange rich

glow which was really daylight, and yet had a mellow

something about it which was very different from the hard

white glare of the kind of daylight I was used to.

Its radiance was strong and clear, but at the same time

it was singularly soft, and spiritual, and benignant.

No, it was not our harsh, aggressive, realistic daylight;

it seemed properer to an enchanted land--or to heaven.



I had seen moonlight and daylight together before, but I

had not seen daylight and black night elbow to elbow before.

At least I had not seen the daylight resting upon an object

sufficiently close at hand, before, to make the contrast

startling and at war with nature.



The daylight passed away.  Presently the moon rose up

behind some of those sky-piercing fingers or pinnacles

of bare rock of which I have spoken--they were a little

to the left of the crest of Mont Blanc, and right over

our heads--but she couldn't manage to climb high

enough toward heaven to get entirely above them.

She would show the glittering arch of her upper third,

occasionally, and scrape it along behind the comblike row;

sometimes a pinnacle stood straight up, like a statuette

of ebony, against that glittering white shield, then seemed

to glide out of it by its own volition and power,

and become a dim specter, while the next pinnacle glided

into its place and blotted the spotless disk with the black

exclamation-point of its presence.  The top of one pinnacle

took the shapely, clean-cut form of a rabbit's head,

in the inkiest silhouette, while it rested against the moon.

The unillumined peaks and minarets, hovering vague and

phantom-like above us while the others were painfully

white and strong with snow and moonlight, made a peculiar effect.





But when the moon, having passed the line of pinnacles,

was hidden behind the stupendous white swell of Mont Blanc,

the masterpiece of the evening was flung on the canvas.

A rich greenish radiance sprang into the sky from behind

the mountain, and in this same airy shreds and ribbons of vapor

floated about, and being flushed with that strange tint,

went waving to and fro like pale green flames.  After a while,

radiating bars--vast broadening fan-shaped shadows--grew up

and stretched away to the zenith from behind the mountain.

It was a spectacle to take one's breath, for the wonder of it,

and the sublimity.



Indeed, those mighty bars of alternate light and shadow

streaming up from behind that dark and prodigious form

and occupying the half of the dull and opaque heavens,

was the most imposing and impressive marvel I had ever

looked upon.  There is no simile for it, for nothing

is like it.  If a child had asked me what it was,

I should have said, "Humble yourself, in this presence,

it is the glory flowing from the hidden head of the Creator."

One falls shorter of the truth than that, sometimes,

in trying to explain mysteries to the little people.

I could have found out the cause of this awe-compelling

miracle by inquiring, for it is not infrequent at Mont

Blanc,--but I did not wish to know.  We have not the

reverent feeling for the rainbow that a savage has,

because we know how it is made.  We have lost as much as we

gained by prying into the matter.



We took a walk down street, a block or two, and a

place where four streets met and the principal shops

were clustered, found the groups of men in the roadway

thicker than ever--for this was the Exchange of Chamonix.

These men were in the costumes of guides and porters,

and were there to be hired.



The office of that great personage, the Guide-in-Chief

of the Chamonix Guild of Guides, was near by.  This guild

is a close corporation, and is governed by strict laws.

There are many excursion routes, some dangerous and

some not, some that can be made safely without a guide,

and some that cannot.  The bureau determines these things.

Where it decides that a guide is necessary, you are

forbidden to go without one.  Neither are you allowed to be

a victim of extortion: the law states what you are to pay.

The guides serve in rotation; you cannot select the man

who is to take your life into his hands, you must take

the worst in the lot, if it is his turn.  A guide's fee

ranges all the way up from a half-dollar (for some trifling

excursion of a few rods) to twenty dollars, according to

the distance traversed and the nature of the ground.

A guide's fee for taking a person to the summit of Mont

Blanc and back, is twenty dollars--and he earns it.

The time employed is usually three days, and there is

enough early rising in it to make a man far more "healthy

and wealthy and wise" than any one man has any right to be.

The porter's fee for the same trip is ten dollars.

Several fools--no, I mean several tourists--usually go together,

and divide up the expense, and thus make it light;

for if only one f--tourist, I mean--went, he would have

to have several guides and porters, and that would make the

matter costly.



We went into the Chief's office.  There were maps

of mountains on the walls; also one or two lithographs

of celebrated guides, and a portrait of the scientist

De Saussure.



In glass cases were some labeled fragments of boots

and batons, and other suggestive relics and remembrances

of casualties on Mount Blanc.  In a book was a record of all

the ascents which have ever been made, beginning with Nos.

1 and 2--being those of Jacques Balmat and De Saussure,

in 1787, and ending with No. 685, which wasn't cold yet.

In fact No. 685 was standing by the official table waiting

to receive the precious official diploma which should prove

to his German household and to his descendants that he had once

been indiscreet enough to climb to the top of Mont Blanc.

He looked very happy when he got his document; in fact,

he spoke up and said he WAS happy.



I tried to buy a diploma for an invalid friend at home

who had never traveled, and whose desire all his life has

been to ascend Mont Blanc, but the Guide-in-Chief rather

insolently refused to sell me one.  I was very much offended.

I said I did not propose to be discriminated against on

the account of my nationality; that he had just sold

a diploma to this German gentleman, and my money was

a good as his; I would see to it that he couldn't keep

his shop for Germans and deny his produce to Americans;

I would have his license taken away from him at the dropping

of a handkerchief; if France refused to break him, I would

make an international matter of it and bring on a war;

the soil should be drenched with blood; and not only that,

but I would set up an opposition show and sell diplomas

at half price.



For two cents I would have done these things, too;

but nobody offered me two cents.  I tried to move that

German's feelings, but it could not be done; he would

not give me his diploma, neither would he sell it to me.

I TOLD him my friend was sick and could not come himself,

but he said he did not care a VERDAMMTES PFENNIG,

he wanted his diploma for himself--did I suppose he was

going to risk his neck for that thing and then give it

to a sick stranger? Indeed he wouldn't, so he wouldn't.

I resolved, then, that I would do all I could to injure

Mont Blanc.



In the record-book was a list of all the fatal accidents

which happened on the mountain.  It began with the one

in 1820 when the Russian Dr. Hamel's three guides were

lost in a crevice of the glacier, and it recorded the

delivery of the remains in the valley by the slow-moving

glacier forty-one years later.  The latest catastrophe

bore the date 1877.



We stepped out and roved about the village awhile.

In front of the little church was a monument to the memory

of the bold guide Jacques Balmat, the first man who ever

stood upon the summit of Mont Blanc.  He made that wild

trip solitary and alone.  He accomplished the ascent

a number of times afterward.  A stretch of nearly half

a century lay between his first ascent and his last one.

At the ripe old age of seventy-two he was climbing

around a corner of a lofty precipice of the Pic du

Midi--nobody with him--when he slipped and fell.

So he died in the harness.



He had grown very avaricious in his old age, and used to go

off stealthily to hunt for non-existent and impossible

gold among those perilous peaks and precipices.

He was on a quest of that kind when he lost his life.

There was a statue to him, and another to De Saussure,

in the hall of our hotel, and a metal plate on the door

of a room upstairs bore an inscription to the effect

that that room had been occupied by Albert Smith.

Balmat and De Saussure discovered Mont Blanc--so to

speak--but it was Smith who made it a paying property.

His articles in BLACKWOOD and his lectures on Mont Blanc

in London advertised it and made people as anxious to see it

as if it owed them money.



As we strolled along the road we looked up and saw a red

signal-light glowing in the darkness of the mountainside.

It seemed but a trifling way up--perhaps a hundred yards,

a climb of ten minutes.  It was a lucky piece of sagacity

in us that we concluded to stop a man whom we met and get

a light for our pipes from him instead of continuing the climb

to that lantern to get a light, as had been our purpose.

The man said that that lantern was on the Grands Mulets,

some sixty-five hundred feet above the valley! I know

by our Riffelberg experience, that it would have taken us

a good part of a week to go up there.  I would sooner not

smoke at all, than take all that trouble for a light.



Even in the daytime the foreshadowing effect of this

mountain's close proximity creates curious deceptions.

For instance, one sees with the naked eye a cabin up

there beside the glacier, and a little above and beyond

he sees the spot where that red light was located;

he thinks he could throw a stone from the one place to

the other.  But he couldn't, for the difference between

the two altitudes is more than three thousand feet.

It looks impossible, from below, that this can be true,

but it is true, nevertheless.



While strolling around, we kept the run of the moon all

the time, and we still kept an eye on her after we got back

to the hotel portico.  I had a theory that the gravitation

of refraction, being subsidiary to atmospheric compensation,

the refrangibility of the earth's surface would emphasize

this effect in regions where great mountain ranges occur,

and possibly so even-handed impact the odic and idyllic

forces together, the one upon the other, as to prevent

the moon from rising higher than 12,200 feet above

sea-level. This daring theory had been received with frantic

scorn by some of my fellow-scientists, and with an eager

silence by others.  Among the former I may mention

Prof. H----y; and among the latter Prof. T----l. Such

is professional jealousy; a scientist will never show

any kindness for a theory which he did not start himself.

There is no feeling of brotherhood among these people.

Indeed, they always resent it when I call them brother.

To show how far their ungenerosity can carry them, I will

state that I offered to let Prof. H----y publish my great

theory as his own discovery; I even begged him to do it;

I even proposed to print it myself as his theory.

Instead of thanking me, he said that if I tried to

fasten that theory on him he would sue me for slander.

I was going to offer it to Mr. Darwin, whom I understood

to be a man without prejudices, but it occurred to me

that perhaps he would not be interested in it since it did

not concern heraldry.



But I am glad now, that I was forced to father my intrepid

theory myself, for, on the night of which I am writing,

it was triumphantly justified and established.  Mont Blanc

is nearly sixteen thousand feet high; he hid the moon utterly;

near him is a peak which is 12,216 feet high; the moon slid

along behind the pinnacles, and when she approached that

one I watched her with intense interest, for my reputation

as a scientist must stand or fall by its decision.

I cannot describe the emotions which surged like tidal

waves through my breast when I saw the moon glide behind

that lofty needle and pass it by without exposing more

than two feet four inches of her upper rim above it;

I was secure, then.  I knew she could rise no higher,

and I was right.  She sailed behind all the peaks and

never succeeded in hoisting her disk above a single one

of them.



While the moon was behind one of those sharp fingers,

its shadow was flung athwart the vacant heavens

--a long, slanting, clean-cut, dark ray--with a streaming

and energetic suggestion of FORCE about it, such as the

ascending jet of water from a powerful fire-engine affords.

It was curious to see a good strong shadow of an earthly

object cast upon so intangible a field as the atmosphere.



We went to bed, at last, and went quickly to sleep, but I

woke up, after about three hours, with throbbing temples,

and a head which was physically sore, outside and in.

I was dazed, dreamy, wretched, seedy, unrefreshed.

I recognized the occasion of all this: it was that torrent.

In the mountain villages of Switzerland, and along the roads,

one has always the roar of the torrent in his ears.

He imagines it is music, and he thinks poetic things

about it; he lies in his comfortable bed and is lulled

to sleep by it.  But by and by he begins to notice

that his head is very sore--he cannot account for it;

in solitudes where the profoundest silence reigns,

he notices a sullen, distant, continuous roar in his ears,

which is like what he would experience if he had sea-shells

pressed against them--he cannot account for it; he is

drowsy and absent-minded; there is no tenacity to his mind,

he cannot keep hold of a thought and follow it out;

if he sits down to write, his vocabulary is empty,

no suitable words will come, he forgets what he started to do,

and remains there, pen in hand, head tilted up, eyes closed,

listening painfully to the muffled roar of a distant train

in his ears; in his soundest sleep the strain continues,

he goes on listening, always listening intently, anxiously,

and wakes at last, harassed, irritable, unrefreshed.

He cannot manage to account for these things.

Day after day he feels as if he had spent his nights

in a sleeping-car. It actually takes him weeks to find

out that it is those persecuting torrents that have been

making all the mischief.  It is time for him to get out

of Switzerland, then, for as soon as he has discovered

the cause, the misery is magnified several fold.  The roar

of the torrent is maddening, then, for his imagination

is assisting; the physical pain it inflicts is exquisite.

When he finds he is approaching one of those streams,

his dread is so lively that he is disposed to fly the track

and avoid the implacable foe.



Eight or nine months after the distress of the torrents

had departed from me, the roar and thunder of the

streets of Paris brought it all back again.  I moved

to the sixth story of the hotel to hunt for peace.

About midnight the noises dulled away, and I was

sinking to sleep, when I heard a new and curious sound;

I listened: evidently some joyous lunatic was softly

dancing a "double shuffle" in the room over my head.

I had to wait for him to get through, of course.  Five long,

long minutes he smoothly shuffled away--a pause followed,

then something fell with a thump on the floor.

I said to myself "There--he is pulling off his boots

--thank heavens he is done." Another slight pause--he went

to shuffling again! I said to myself, "Is he trying to see

what he can do with only one boot on?" Presently came

another pause and another thump on the floor.  I said

"Good, he has pulled off his other boot--NOW he is done."

But he wasn't. The next moment he was shuffling again.

I said, "Confound him, he is at it in his slippers!"

After a little came that same old pause, and right after

it that thump on the floor once more.  I said, "Hang him,

he had on TWO pair of boots!" For an hour that magician

went on shuffling and pulling off boots till he had shed

as many as twenty-five pair, and I was hovering on the verge

of lunacy.  I got my gun and stole up there.  The fellow

was in the midst of an acre of sprawling boots, and he had

a boot in his hand, shuffling it--no, I mean POLISHING it.

The mystery was explained.  He hadn't been dancing.

He was the "Boots" of the hotel, and was attending

to business.







CHAPTER XLIV

[I Scale Mont Blanc--by Telescope]



After breakfast, that next morning in Chamonix, we went

out in the yard and watched the gangs of excursioning

tourists arriving and departing with their mules and guides

and porters; then we took a look through the telescope

at the snowy hump of Mont Blanc.  It was brilliant

with sunshine, and the vast smooth bulge seemed hardly

five hundred yards away.  With the naked eye we could

dimly make out the house at the Pierre Pointue, which is

located by the side of the great glacier, and is more

than three thousand feet above the level of the valley;

but with the telescope we could see all its details.

While I looked, a woman rode by the house on a mule, and I

saw her with sharp distinctness; I could have described

her dress.  I saw her nod to the people of the house,

and rein up her mule, and put her hand up to shield

her eyes from the sun.  I was not used to telescopes;

in fact, I had never looked through a good one before;

it seemed incredible to me that this woman could be

so far away.  I was satisfied that I could see all

these details with my naked eye; but when I tried it,

that mule and those vivid people had wholly vanished,

and the house itself was become small and vague.  I tried

the telescope again, and again everything was vivid.

The strong black shadows of the mule and the woman were

flung against the side of the house, and I saw the mule's

silhouette wave its ears.



The telescopulist--or the telescopulariat--I do not know

which is right--said a party were making a grand ascent,

and would come in sight on the remote upper heights,

presently; so we waited to observe this performance.

Presently I had a superb idea.  I wanted to stand with

a party on the summit of Mont Blanc, merely to be able

to say I had done it, and I believed the telescope

could set me within seven feet of the uppermost man.

The telescoper assured me that it could.  I then asked

him how much I owed him for as far as I had got? He said,

one franc.  I asked him how much it would cost to make

the entire ascent? Three francs.  I at once determined

to make the entire ascent.  But first I inquired

if there was any danger? He said no--not by telescope;

said he had taken a great many parties to the summit,

and never lost a man.  I asked what he would charge to let

my agent go with me, together with such guides and porters

as might be necessary.  He said he would let Harris go

for two francs; and that unless we were unusually timid,

he should consider guides and porters unnecessary;

it was not customary to take them, when going by telescope,

for they were rather an encumbrance than a help.

He said that the party now on the mountain were approaching

the most difficult part, and if we hurried we should

overtake them within ten minutes, and could then join them

and have the benefit of their guides and porters without

their knowledge, and without expense to us.



I then said we would start immediately.  I believe I

said it calmly, though I was conscious of a shudder

and of a paling cheek, in view of the nature of the

exploit I was so unreflectingly engaged in.  But the old

daredevil spirit was upon me, and I said that as I

had committed myself I would not back down; I would

ascend Mont Blanc if it cost me my life.  I told the man

to slant his machine in the proper direction and let us be off.



Harris was afraid and did not want to go, but I heartened

him up and said I would hold his hand all the way; so he

gave his consent, though he trembled a little at first.

I took a last pathetic look upon the pleasant summer scene

about me, then boldly put my eye to the glass and prepared

to mount among the grim glaciers and the everlasting snows.



We took our way carefully and cautiously across the great

Glacier des Bossons, over yawning and terrific crevices

and among imposing crags and buttresses of ice which were

fringed with icicles of gigantic proportions.  The desert

of ice that stretched far and wide about us was wild and

desolate beyond description, and the perils which beset us

were so great that at times I was minded to turn back.

But I pulled my pluck together and pushed on.



We passed the glacier safely and began to mount

the steeps beyond, with great alacrity.  When we

were seven minutes out from the starting-point, we

reached an altitude where the scene took a new aspect;

an apparently limitless continent of gleaming snow was

tilted heavenward before our faces.  As my eye followed

that awful acclivity far away up into the remote skies,

it seemed to me that all I had ever seen before of sublimity

and magnitude was small and insignificant compared to this.



We rested a moment, and then began to mount with speed.

Within three minutes we caught sight of the party ahead of us,

and stopped to observe them.  They were toiling up a long,

slanting ridge of snow--twelve persons, roped together some

fifteen feet apart, marching in single file, and strongly

marked against the clear blue sky.  One was a woman.

We could see them lift their feet and put them down;

we saw them swing their alpenstocks forward in unison,

like so many pendulums, and then bear their weight

upon them; we saw the lady wave her handkerchief.

They dragged themselves upward in a worn and weary way,

for they had been climbing steadily from the Grand Mulets,

on the Glacier des Dossons, since three in the morning,

and it was eleven, now.  We saw them sink down in the

snow and rest, and drink something from a bottle.

After a while they moved on, and as they approached the final

short dash of the home-stretch we closed up on them and

joined them.



Presently we all stood together on the summit! What a view

was spread out below! Away off under the northwestern horizon

rolled the silent billows of the Farnese Oberland, their snowy

crests glinting softly in the subdued lights of distance;

in the north rose the giant form of the Wobblehorn,

draped from peak to shoulder in sable thunder-clouds;

beyond him, to the right, stretched the grand processional

summits of the Cisalpine Cordillera, drowned in a

sensuous haze; to the east loomed the colossal masses

of the Yodelhorn, the Fuddelhorn, and the Dinnerhorn,

their cloudless summits flashing white and cold in the sun;

beyond them shimmered the faint far line of the Ghauts

of Jubbelpore and the Aigulles des Alleghenies; in the

south towered the smoking peak of Popocatapetl and the

unapproachable altitudes of the peerless Scrabblehorn;

in the west-south the stately range of the Himalayas

lay dreaming in a purple gloom; and thence all around

the curving horizon the eye roved over a troubled sea

of sun-kissed Alps, and noted, here and there, the noble

proportions and the soaring domes of the Bottlehorn,

and the Saddlehorn, and the Shovelhorn, and the Powderhorn,

all bathed in the glory of noon and mottled with softly

gliding blots, the shadows flung from drifting clouds.



Overcome by the scene, we all raised a triumphant,

tremendous shout, in unison.  A startled man at my elbow

said:



"Confound you, what do you yell like that for, right here

in the street?"



That brought me down to Chamonix, like a flirt.

I gave that man some spiritual advice and disposed of him,

and then paid the telescope man his full fee, and said

that we were charmed with the trip and would remain down,

and not reascend and require him to fetch us down by telescope.

This pleased him very much, for of course we could have

stepped back to the summit and put him to the trouble

of bringing us home if we wanted to.



I judged we could get diplomas, now, anyhow; so we

went after them, but the Chief Guide put us off,

with one pretext or another, during all the time we stayed

in Chamonix, and we ended by never getting them at all.

So much for his prejudice against people's nationality.

However, we worried him enough to make him remember

us and our ascent for some time.  He even said, once,

that he wished there was a lunatic asylum in Chamonix.

This shows that he really had fears that we were going

to drive him mad.  It was what we intended to do,

but lack of time defeated it.



I cannot venture to advise the reader one way or the other,

as to ascending Mont Blanc.  I say only this: if he is at

all timid, the enjoyments of the trip will hardly make up

for the hardships and sufferings he will have to endure.

But, if he has good nerve, youth, health, and a bold,

firm will, and could leave his family comfortably provided

for in case the worst happened, he would find the ascent

a wonderful experience, and the view from the top a vision

to dream about, and tell about, and recall with exultation

all the days of his life.



While I do not advise such a person to attempt the ascent,

I do not advise him against it.  But if he elects to attempt it,

let him be warily careful of two things: chose a calm,

clear day; and do not pay the telescope man in advance.

There are dark stories of his getting advance payers on

the summit and then leaving them there to rot.



A frightful tragedy was once witnessed through the

Chamonix telescopes.  Think of questions and answers

like these, on an inquest:



CORONER.  You saw deceased lose his life?



WITNESS.  I did.



C. Where was he, at the time?



W. Close to the summit of Mont Blanc.



C. Where were you?



W. In the main street of Chamonix.



C. What was the distance between you?



W. A LITTLE OVER FIVE MILES, as the bird flies.



This accident occurred in 1866, a year and a month after the

disaster on the Matterhorn.  Three adventurous English gentlemen,

[1] of great experience in mountain-climbing, made up their

minds to ascend Mont Blanc without guides or porters.

All endeavors to dissuade them from their project failed.

Powerful telescopes are numerous in Chamonix.  These huge

brass tubes, mounted on their scaffoldings and pointed

skyward from every choice vantage-ground, have the

formidable look of artillery, and give the town the general

aspect of getting ready to repel a charge of angels.

The reader may easily believe that the telescopes

had plenty of custom on that August morning in 1866,

for everybody knew of the dangerous undertaking which was

on foot, and all had fears that misfortune would result.

All the morning the tubes remained directed toward the

mountain heights, each with its anxious group around it;

but the white deserts were vacant.



1.  Sir George Young and his brothers James and Albert.



At last, toward eleven o'clock, the people who were

looking through the telescopes cried out "There they

are!"--and sure enough, far up, on the loftiest terraces

of the Grand Plateau, the three pygmies appeared,

climbing with remarkable vigor and spirit.  They disappeared

in the "Corridor," and were lost to sight during an hour.

Then they reappeared, and were presently seen standing together

upon the extreme summit of Mont Blanc.  So, all was well.

They remained a few minutes on that highest point of land

in Europe, a target for all the telescopes, and were then

seen to begin descent.  Suddenly all three vanished.

An instant after, they appeared again, TWO THOUSAND FEET

BELOW!



Evidently, they had tripped and been shot down an almost

perpendicular slope of ice to a point where it joined

the border of the upper glacier.  Naturally, the distant

witness supposed they were now looking upon three corpses;

so they could hardly believe their eyes when they presently saw

two of the men rise to their feet and bend over the third.

During two hours and a half they watched the two busying

themselves over the extended form of their brother,

who seemed entirely inert.  Chamonix's affairs stood still;

everybody was in the street, all interest was centered

upon what was going on upon that lofty and isolated stage

five miles away.  Finally the two--one of them walking

with great difficulty--were seen to begin descent,

abandoning the third, who was no doubt lifeless.

Their movements were followed, step by step, until they

reached the "Corridor" and disappeared behind its ridge.

Before they had had time to traverse the "Corridor"

and reappear, twilight was come, and the power of the

telescope was at an end.



The survivors had a most perilous journey before

them in the gathering darkness, for they must get

down to the Grands Mulets before they would find

a safe stopping-place--a long and tedious descent,

and perilous enough even in good daylight.  The oldest

guides expressed the opinion that they could not succeed;

that all the chances were that they would lose their lives.



Yet those brave men did succeed.  They reached the Grands

Mulets in safety.  Even the fearful shock which their nerves

had sustained was not sufficient to overcome their coolness

and courage.  It would appear from the official account

that they were threading their way down through those

dangers from the closing in of twilight until two o'clock

in the morning, or later, because the rescuing party from

Chamonix reached the Grand Mulets about three in the morning

and moved thence toward the scene of the disaster under

the leadership of Sir George Young, "who had only just arrived."



After having been on his feet twenty-four hours,

in the exhausting work of mountain-climbing, Sir George

began the reascent at the head of the relief party

of six guides, to recover the corpse of his brother.

This was considered a new imprudence, as the number

was too few for the service required.  Another relief

party presently arrived at the cabin on the Grands

Mulets and quartered themselves there to await events.

Ten hours after Sir George's departure toward the summit,

this new relief were still scanning the snowy altitudes

above them from their own high perch among the ice

deserts ten thousand feet above the level of the sea,

but the whole forenoon had passed without a glimpse of any

living thing appearing up there.



This was alarming.  Half a dozen of their number set out,

then early in the afternoon, to seek and succor Sir George

and his guides.  The persons remaining at the cabin saw

these disappear, and then ensued another distressing wait.

Four hours passed, without tidings.  Then at five

o'clock another relief, consisting of three guides,

set forward from the cabin.  They carried food and

cordials for the refreshment of their predecessors;

they took lanterns with them, too; night was coming on,

and to make matters worse, a fine, cold rain had begun

to fall.



At the same hour that these three began their dangerous ascent,

the official Guide-in-Chief of the Mont Blanc region

undertook the dangerous descent to Chamonix, all alone,

to get reinforcements.  However, a couple of hours later,

at 7 P.M., the anxious solicitude came to an end,

and happily.  A bugle note was heard, and a cluster

of black specks was distinguishable against the snows

of the upper heights.  The watchers counted these specks

eagerly--fourteen--nobody was missing.  An hour and a half

later they were all safe under the roof of the cabin.

They had brought the corpse with them.  Sir George Young

tarried there but a few minutes, and then began the long

and troublesome descent from the cabin to Chamonix.

He probably reached there about two or three o'clock

in the morning, after having been afoot among the rocks

and glaciers during two days and two nights.  His endurance

was equal to his daring.



The cause of the unaccountable delay of Sir George and

the relief parties among the heights where the disaster

had happened was a thick fog--or, partly that and partly

the slow and difficult work of conveying the dead body

down the perilous steeps.



The corpse, upon being viewed at the inquest, showed

no bruises, and it was some time before the surgeons

discovered that the neck was broken.  One of the surviving

brothers had sustained some unimportant injuries,

but the other had suffered no hurt at all.  How these men

could fall two thousand feet, almost perpendicularly,

and live afterward, is a most strange and unaccountable thing.



A great many women have made the ascent of Mont Blanc.

An English girl, Miss Stratton, conceived the daring idea,

two or three years ago, of attempting the ascent in the

middle of winter.  She tried it--and she succeeded.

Moreover, she froze two of her fingers on the way up,

she fell in love with her guide on the summit,

and she married him when she got to the bottom again.

There is nothing in romance, in the way of a striking

"situation," which can beat this love scene in midheaven

on an isolated ice-crest with the thermometer at zero

and an Artic gale blowing.



The first woman who ascended Mont Blanc was a girl aged

twenty-two--Mlle. Maria Paradis--1809. Nobody was

with her but her sweetheart, and he was not a guide.

The sex then took a rest for about thirty years,

when a Mlle. d'Angeville made the ascent --1838. In

Chamonix I picked up a rude old lithograph of that day

which pictured her "in the act."



However, I value it less as a work of art than as a

fashion-plate. Miss d'Angeville put on a pair of men's

pantaloons to climb it, which was wise; but she cramped

their utility by adding her petticoat, which was idiotic.



One of the mournfulest calamities which men's disposition

to climb dangerous mountains has resulted in,

happened on Mont Blanc in September 1870.  M. D'Arve

tells the story briefly in his HISTOIRE DU MONT BLANC.

In the next chapter I will copy its chief features.







CHAPTER XLV

A Catastrophe Which Cost Eleven Lives

[Perished at the Verge of Safety]



On the 5th of September, 1870, a caravan of eleven persons

departed from Chamonix to make the ascent of Mont Blanc.

Three of the party were tourists; Messrs.  Randall and Bean,

Americans, and Mr. George Corkindale, a Scotch gentleman;

there were three guides and five porters.  The cabin

on the Grands Mulets was reached that day; the ascent

was resumed early the next morning, September 6th.

The day was fine and clear, and the movements of the party

were observed through the telescopes of Chamonix; at two

o'clock in the afternoon they were seen to reach the summit.

A few minutes later they were seen making the first steps

of the descent; then a cloud closed around them and hid

them from view.



Eight hours passed, the cloud still remained, night came,

no one had returned to the Grands Mulets.  Sylvain Couttet,

keeper of the cabin there, suspected a misfortune,

and sent down to the valley for help.  A detachment of

guides went up, but by the time they had made the tedious

trip and reached the cabin, a raging storm had set in.

They had to wait; nothing could be attempted in such

a tempest.



The wild storm lasted MORE THAN A WEEK, without ceasing;

but on the 17th, Couttet, with several guides, left the

cabin and succeeded in making the ascent.  In the snowy

wastes near the summit they came upon five bodies,

lying upon their sides in a reposeful attitude which

suggested that possibly they had fallen asleep there,

while exhausted with fatigue and hunger and benumbed with cold,

and never knew when death stole upon them.  Couttet moved

a few steps further and discovered five more bodies.

The eleventh corpse--that of a porter--was not found,

although diligent search was made for it.



In the pocket of Mr. Bean, one of the Americans, was found

a note-book in which had been penciled some sentences

which admit us, in flesh and spirit, as it were, to the

presence of these men during their last hours of life,

and to the grisly horrors which their fading vision looked

upon and their failing consciousness took cognizance of:



TUESDAY, SEPT.  6.  I have made the ascent of Mont Blanc,

with ten persons--eight guides, and Mr. Corkindale

and Mr. Randall.  We reached the summit at half past 2.

Immediately after quitting it, we were enveloped in clouds

of snow.  We passed the night in a grotto hollowed

in the snow, which afforded us but poor shelter, and I

was ill all night.



SEPT.  7--MORNING. The cold is excessive.  The snow falls

heavily and without interruption.  The guides take no rest.



EVENING.  My Dear Hessie, we have been two days on

Mont Blanc, in the midst of a terrible hurricane of snow,

we have lost our way, and are in a hole scooped in the snow,

at an altitude of 15,000 feet.  I have no longer any hope

of descending.



They had wandered around, and around, in the blinding

snow-storm, hopelessly lost, in a space only a hundred

yards square; and when cold and fatigue vanquished them

at last, they scooped their cave and lay down there

to die by inches, UNAWARE THAT FIVE STEPS MORE WOULD HAVE

BROUGHT THEM INTO THE TRUTH PATH.  They were so near

to life and safety as that, and did not suspect it.

The thought of this gives the sharpest pang that the tragic

story conveys.



The author of the HISTOIRE DU MONT BLANC introduced

the closing sentences of Mr. Bean's pathetic record thus:



"Here the characters are large and unsteady; the hand

which traces them is become chilled and torpid;

but the spirit survives, and the faith and resignation

of the dying man are expressed with a sublime simplicity."



Perhaps this note-book will be found and sent to you.

We have nothing to eat, my feet are already frozen,

and I am exhausted; I have strength to write only a few

words more.  I have left means for C's education; I know

you will employ them wisely.  I die with faith in God,

and with loving thoughts of you.  Farewell to all.

We shall meet again, in Heaven. ... I think of

you always.



It is the way of the Alps to deliver death to their victims

with a merciful swiftness, but here the rule failed.

These men suffered the bitterest death that has been

recorded in the history of those mountains, freighted as

that history is with grisly tragedies.







CHAPTER XLVI

[Meeting a Hog on a Precipice]



Mr. Harris and I took some guides and porters and ascended

to the Ho^tel des Pyramides, which is perched on the

high moraine which borders the Glacier des Bossons.

The road led sharply uphill, all the way, through grass

and flowers and woods, and was a pleasant walk,

barring the fatigue of the climb.



From the hotel we could view the huge glacier at very

close range.  After a rest we followed down a path

which had been made in the steep inner frontage

of the moraine, and stepped upon the glacier itself.

One of the shows of the place was a tunnel-like cavern,

which had been hewn in the glacier.  The proprietor

of this tunnel took candles and conducted us into it.

It was three or four feet wide and about six feet high.

Its walls of pure and solid ice emitted a soft and rich

blue light that produced a lovely effect, and suggested

enchanted caves, and that sort of thing.  When we had

proceeded some yards and were entering darkness, we turned

about and had a dainty sunlit picture of distant woods

and heights framed in the strong arch of the tunnel and seen

through the tender blue radiance of the tunnel's atmosphere.



The cavern was nearly a hundred yards long, and when we

reached its inner limit the proprietor stepped into a branch

tunnel with his candles and left us buried in the bowels

of the glacier, and in pitch-darkness. We judged his

purpose was murder and robbery; so we got out our matches

and prepared to sell our lives as dearly as possible

by setting the glacier on fire if the worst came to the

worst--but we soon perceived that this man had changed

his mind; he began to sing, in a deep, melodious voice,

and woke some curious and pleasing echoes.  By and by he

came back and pretended that that was what he had gone

behind there for.  We believed as much of that as we wanted to.



Thus our lives had been once more in imminent peril,

but by the exercise of the swift sagacity and cool courage

which had saved us so often, we had added another escape

to the long list.  The tourist should visit that ice-cavern,

by all means, for it is well worth the trouble; but I would

advise him to go only with a strong and well-armed force.

I do not consider artillery necessary, yet it would not be

unadvisable to take it along, if convenient.  The journey,

going and coming, is about three miles and a half, three of

which are on level ground.  We made it in less than a day,

but I would counsel the unpracticed--if not pressed

for time--to allow themselves two.  Nothing is gained

in the Alps by over-exertion; nothing is gained by crowding

two days' work into one for the poor sake of being able

to boast of the exploit afterward.  It will be found

much better, in the long run, to do the thing in two days,

and then subtract one of them from the narrative.

This saves fatigue, and does not injure the narrative.

All the more thoughtful among the Alpine tourists

do this.



We now called upon the Guide-in-Chief, and asked for a squadron

of guides and porters for the ascent of the Montanvert.

This idiot glared at us, and said:



"You don't need guides and porters to go to the Montanvert."



"What do we need, then?"



"Such as YOU?--an ambulance!"



I was so stung by this brutal remark that I took

my custom elsewhere.



Betimes, next morning, we had reached an altitude of five

thousand feet above the level of the sea.  Here we camped

and breakfasted.  There was a cabin there--the spot is

called the Caillet--and a spring of ice-cold water.

On the door of the cabin was a sign, in French, to the effect

that "One may here see a living chamois for fifty centimes."

We did not invest; what we wanted was to see a dead one.



A little after noon we ended the ascent and arrived at the

new hotel on the Montanvert, and had a view of six miles,

right up the great glacier, the famous Mer de Glace.

At this point it is like a sea whose deep swales and long,

rolling swells have been caught in mid-movement and

frozen solid; but further up it is broken up into wildly

tossing billows of ice.



We descended a ticklish path in the steep side of the moraine,

and invaded the glacier.  There were tourists of both

sexes scattered far and wide over it, everywhere, and it

had the festive look of a skating-rink.



The Empress Josephine came this far, once.  She ascended

the Montanvert in 1810--but not alone; a small army

of men preceded her to clear the path--and carpet it,

perhaps--and she followed, under the protection

of SIXTY-EIGHT guides.



Her successor visited Chamonix later, but in far different style.



It was seven weeks after the first fall of the Empire,

and poor Marie Louise, ex-Empress was a fugitive.

She came at night, and in a storm, with only two attendants,

and stood before a peasant's hut, tired, bedraggled,

soaked with rain, "the red print of her lost crown still

girdling her brow," and implored admittance--and was

refused! A few days before, the adulations and applauses

of a nation were sounding in her ears, and now she was come to

this!



We crossed the Mer de Glace in safety, but we had misgivings.

The crevices in the ice yawned deep and blue and mysterious,

and it made one nervous to traverse them.  The huge

round waves of ice were slippery and difficult to climb,

and the chances of tripping and sliding down them and

darting into a crevice were too many to be comfortable.



In the bottom of a deep swale between two of the biggest

of the ice-waves, we found a fraud who pretended

to be cutting steps to insure the safety of tourists.

He was "soldiering" when we came upon him, but he hopped

up and chipped out a couple of steps about big enough

for a cat, and charged us a franc or two for it.

Then he sat down again, to doze till the next party

should come along.  He had collected blackmail from two

or three hundred people already, that day, but had not

chipped out ice enough to impair the glacier perceptibly.

I have heard of a good many soft sinecures, but it seems

to me that keeping toll-bridge on a glacier is the softest

one I have encountered yet.



That was a blazing hot day, and it brought a persistent

and persecuting thirst with it.  What an unspeakable luxury

it was to slake that thirst with the pure and limpid

ice-water of the glacier! Down the sides of every great rib

of pure ice poured limpid rills in gutters carved by their

own attrition; better still, wherever a rock had lain,

there was now a bowl-shaped hole, with smooth white sides

and bottom of ice, and this bowl was brimming with water

of such absolute clearness that the careless observer would

not see it at all, but would think the bowl was empty.

These fountains had such an alluring look that I often

stretched myself out when I was not thirsty and dipped my

face in and drank till my teeth ached.  Everywhere among

the Swiss mountains we had at hand the blessing--not

to be found in Europe EXCEPT in the mountains--of water

capable of quenching thirst.  Everywhere in the Swiss

highlands brilliant little rills of exquisitely cold water

went dancing along by the roadsides, and my comrade and I

were always drinking and always delivering our deep gratitude.



But in Europe everywhere except in the mountains, the water

is flat and insipid beyond the power of words to describe.

It is served lukewarm; but no matter, ice could not help it;

it is incurably flat, incurably insipid.  It is only good

to wash with; I wonder it doesn't occur to the average

inhabitant to try it for that.  In Europe the people

say contemptuously, "Nobody drinks water here." Indeed,

they have a sound and sufficient reason.  In many places

they even have what may be called prohibitory reasons.

In Paris and Munich, for instance, they say, "Don't drink

the water, it is simply poison."



Either America is healthier than Europe, notwithstanding her

"deadly" indulgence in ice-water, or she does not keep

the run of her death-rate as sharply as Europe does.

I think we do keep up the death statistics accurately;

and if we do, our cities are healthier than the cities

of Europe.  Every month the German government tabulates

the death-rate of the world and publishes it.  I scrap-booked

these reports during several months, and it was curious

to see how regular and persistently each city repeated

its same death-rate month after month.  The tables might

as well have been stereotyped, they varied so little.

These tables were based upon weekly reports showing the

average of deaths in each 1,000 population for a year.

Munich was always present with her 33 deaths in each

1,000 of her population (yearly average), Chicago was

as constant with her 15 or 17, Dublin with her 48--and

so on.



Only a few American cities appear in these tables, but they

are scattered so widely over the country that they furnish

a good general average of CITY health in the United States;

and I think it will be granted that our towns and villages

are healthier than our cities.



Here is the average of the only American cities reported

in the German tables:



Chicago, deaths in 1,000 population annually,

16; Philadelphia, 18; St. Louis, 18; San Francisco,

19; New York (the Dublin of America), 23.



See how the figures jump up, as soon as one arrives

at the transatlantic list:



Paris, 27; Glasgow, 27; London, 28; Vienna, 28;

Augsburg, 28; Braunschweig, 28; K"onigsberg, 29;

Cologne, 29; Dresden, 29; Hamburg, 29; Berlin, 30;

Bombay, 30; Warsaw, 31; Breslau, 31; Odessa, 32;

Munich, 33; Strasburg, 33, Pesth, 35; Cassel, 35;

Lisbon, 36; Liverpool, 36; Prague, 37; Madras, 37;

Bucharest, 39; St. Petersburg, 40; Trieste, 40;

Alexandria (Egypt), 43; Dublin, 48; Calcutta, 55.



Edinburgh is as healthy as New York--23; but there

is no CITY in the entire list which is healthier,

except Frankfort-on-the-Main--20. But Frankfort is not

as healthy as Chicago, San Francisco, St. Louis, or Philadelphia.





Perhaps a strict average of the world might develop the fact

that where one in 1,000 of America's population dies,

two in 1,000 of the other populations of the earth succumb.



I do not like to make insinuations, but I do think

the above statistics darkly suggest that these people

over here drink this detestable water "on the sly."



We climbed the moraine on the opposite side of the glacier,

and then crept along its sharp ridge a hundred yards or so,

in pretty constant danger of a tumble to the glacier below.

The fall would have been only one hundred feet, but it

would have closed me out as effectually as one thousand,

therefore I respected the distance accordingly, and was

glad when the trip was done.  A moraine is an ugly thing

to assault head-first. At a distance it looks like an endless

grave of fine sand, accurately shaped and nicely smoothed;

but close by, it is found to be made mainly of rough

boulders of all sizes, from that of a man's head to that of

a cottage.



By and by we came to the Mauvais Pas, or the Villainous Road,

to translate it feelingly.  It was a breakneck path

around the face of a precipice forty or fifty feet high,

and nothing to hang on to but some iron railings.

I got along, slowly, safely, and uncomfortably, and finally

reached the middle.  My hopes began to rise a little,

but they were quickly blighted; for there I met a hog--a

long-nosed, bristly fellow, that held up his snout

and worked his nostrils at me inquiringly.  A hog on

a pleasure excursion in Switzerland--think of it! It is

striking and unusual; a body might write a poem about it.

He could not retreat, if he had been disposed to do it.

It would have been foolish to stand upon our dignity

in a place where there was hardly room to stand upon

our feet, so we did nothing of the sort.  There were

twenty or thirty ladies and gentlemen behind us; we all

turned about and went back, and the hog followed behind.

The creature did not seem set up by what he had done;

he had probably done it before.



We reached the restaurant on the height called the Chapeau

at four in the afternoon.  It was a memento-factory, and

the stock was large, cheap, and varied.  I bought the usual

paper-cutter to remember the place by, and had Mont Blanc,

the Mauvais Pas, and the rest of the region branded on

my alpenstock; then we descended to the valley and walked

home without being tied together.  This was not dangerous,

for the valley was five miles wide, and quite level.



We reached the hotel before nine o'clock. Next

morning we left for Geneva on top of the diligence,

under shelter of a gay awning.  If I remember rightly,

there were more than twenty people up there.

It was so high that the ascent was made by ladder.

The huge vehicle was full everywhere, inside and out.

Five other diligences left at the same time, all full.

We had engaged our seats two days beforehand, to make sure,

and paid the regulation price, five dollars each; but the

rest of the company were wiser; they had trusted Baedeker,

and waited; consequently some of them got their seats

for one or two dollars.  Baedeker knows all about hotels,

railway and diligence companies, and speaks his mind freely.

He is a trustworthy friend of the traveler.



We never saw Mont Blanc at his best until we were many

miles away; then he lifted his majestic proportions

high into the heavens, all white and cold and solemn,

and made the rest of the world seem little and plebeian,

and cheap and trivial.



As he passed out of sight at last, an old Englishman

settled himself in his seat and said:



"Well, I am satisfied, I have seen the principal features

of Swiss scenery--Mont Blanc and the goiter--now for home!"







CHAPTER XLVII

[Queer European Manners]



We spent a few pleasant restful days at Geneva,

that delightful city where accurate time-pieces are made

for all the rest of the world, but whose own clocks

never give the correct time of day by any accident.



Geneva is filled with pretty shops, and the shops are

filled with the most enticing gimacrackery, but if one

enters one of these places he is at once pounced upon,

and followed up, and so persecuted to buy this, that,

and the other thing, that he is very grateful to get

out again, and is not at all apt to repeat his experiment.

The shopkeepers of the smaller sort, in Geneva,

are as troublesome and persistent as are the salesmen

of that monster hive in Paris, the Grands Magasins du

Louvre--an establishment where ill-mannered pestering,

pursuing, and insistence have been reduced to a science.



In Geneva, prices in the smaller shops are very elastic

--that is another bad feature.  I was looking in at a window

at a very pretty string of beads, suitable for a child.

I was only admiring them; I had no use for them; I hardly

ever wear beads.  The shopwoman came out and offered

them to me for thirty-five francs.  I said it was cheap,

but I did not need them.



"Ah, but monsieur, they are so beautiful!"



I confessed it, but said they were not suitable for one

of my age and simplicity of character.  She darted in and

brought them out and tried to force them into my hands,

saying:



"Ah, but only see how lovely they are! Surely monsieur will

take them; monsieur shall have them for thirty francs.

There, I have said it--it is a loss, but one must live."



I dropped my hands, and tried to move her to respect

my unprotected situation.  But no, she dangled the beads

in the sun before my face, exclaiming, "Ah, monsieur

CANNOT resist them!" She hung them on my coat button,

folded her hand resignedly, and said: "Gone,--and for

thirty francs, the lovely things--it is incredible!--but

the good God will sanctify the sacrifice to me."



I removed them gently, returned them, and walked away,

shaking my head and smiling a smile of silly embarrassment

while the passers-by halted to observe.  The woman leaned

out of her door, shook the beads, and screamed after me:



"Monsieur shall have them for twenty-eight!"



I shook my head.



"Twenty-seven! It is a cruel loss, it is ruin

--but take them, only take them."



I still retreated, still wagging my head.



"MON DIEU, they shall even go for twenty-six! There,

I have said it.  Come!"



I wagged another negative.  A nurse and a little English girl

had been near me, and were following me, now.  The shopwoman

ran to the nurse, thrust the beads into her hands, and said:



"Monsieur shall have them for twenty-five! Take them

to the hotel--he shall send me the money tomorrow

--next day--when he likes." Then to the child: "When thy

father sends me the money, come thou also, my angel,

and thou shall have something oh so pretty!"



I was thus providentially saved.  The nurse refused

the beads squarely and firmly, and that ended the matter.



The "sights" of Geneva are not numerous.  I made one

attempt to hunt up the houses once inhabited by those

two disagreeable people, Rousseau and Calvin, but I had

no success.  Then I concluded to go home.  I found it was

easier to propose to do that than to do it; for that town

is a bewildering place.  I got lost in a tangle of narrow

and crooked streets, and stayed lost for an hour or two.

Finally I found a street which looked somewhat familiar,

and said to myself, "Now I am at home, I judge." But I

was wrong; this was "HELL street." Presently I found

another place which had a familiar look, and said to myself,

"Now I am at home, sure." It was another error.  This was

"PURGATORY street." After a little I said, "NOW I've got the

right place, anyway ... no, this is 'PARADISE street';

I'm further from home than I was in the beginning."

Those were queer names--Calvin was the author of them,

likely.  "Hell" and "Purgatory" fitted those two streets

like a glove, but the "Paradise" appeared to be sarcastic.



I came out on the lake-front, at last, and then I knew

where I was.  I was walking along before the glittering

jewelry shops when I saw a curious performance.

A lady passed by, and a trim dandy lounged across the walk

in such an apparently carefully timed way as to bring

himself exactly in front of her when she got to him;

he made no offer to step out of the way; he did not apologize;

he did not even notice her.  She had to stop still and let

him lounge by.  I wondered if he had done that piece

of brutality purposely.  He strolled to a chair and seated

himself at a small table; two or three other males were

sitting at similar tables sipping sweetened water.

I waited; presently a youth came by, and this fellow got

up and served him the same trick.  Still, it did not seem

possible that any one could do such a thing deliberately.

To satisfy my curiosity I went around the block, and,

sure enough, as I approached, at a good round speed, he got

up and lounged lazily across my path, fouling my course

exactly at the right moment to receive all my weight.

This proved that his previous performances had not

been accidental, but intentional.



I saw that dandy's curious game played afterward, in Paris,

but not for amusement; not with a motive of any sort, indeed,

but simply from a selfish indifference to other people's

comfort and rights.  One does not see it as frequently

in Paris as he might expect to, for there the law says,

in effect, "It is the business of the weak to get out of

the way of the strong." We fine a cabman if he runs over

a citizen; Paris fines the citizen for being run over.

At least so everybody says--but I saw something which

caused me to doubt; I saw a horseman run over an old woman

one day--the police arrested him and took him away.

That looked as if they meant to punish him.



It will not do for me to find merit in American manners

--for are they not the standing butt for the jests

of critical and polished Europe? Still, I must venture

to claim one little matter of superiority in our manners;

a lady may traverse our streets all day, going and coming

as she chooses, and she will never be molested by any man;

but if a lady, unattended, walks abroad in the streets

of London, even at noonday, she will be pretty likely

to be accosted and insulted--and not by drunken sailors,

but by men who carry the look and wear the dress of gentlemen.

It is maintained that these people are not gentlemen,

but are a lower sort, disguised as gentlemen.  The case

of Colonel Valentine Baker obstructs that argument,

for a man cannot become an officer in the British army

except he hold the rank of gentleman.  This person,

finding himself alone in a railway compartment with

an unprotected girl--but it is an atrocious story,

and doubtless the reader remembers it well enough.

London must have been more or less accustomed to Bakers,

and the ways of Bakers, else London would have been

offended and excited.  Baker was "imprisoned"--in a parlor;

and he could not have been more visited, or more overwhelmed

with attentions, if he had committed six murders and then

--while the gallows was preparing--"got religion"--after

the manner of the holy Charles Peace, of saintly memory.

Arkansaw--it seems a little indelicate to be trumpeting forth

our own superiorities, and comparisons are always odious,

but still--Arkansaw would certainly have hanged Baker.

I do not say she would have tried him first, but she would have

hanged him, anyway.



Even the most degraded woman can walk our streets unmolested,

her sex and her weakness being her sufficient protection.

She will encounter less polish than she would in the

old world, but she will run across enough humanity to make

up for it.



The music of a donkey awoke us early in the morning,

and we rose up and made ready for a pretty formidable

walk--to Italy; but the road was so level that we took

the train.. We lost a good deal of time by this, but it

was no matter, we were not in a hurry.  We were four

hours going to Chamb`ery. The Swiss trains go upward

of three miles an hour, in places, but they are quite safe.



That aged French town of Chamb`ery was as quaint and crooked

as Heilbronn.  A drowsy reposeful quiet reigned in the back

streets which made strolling through them very pleasant,

barring the almost unbearable heat of the sun.

In one of these streets, which was eight feet wide,

gracefully curved, and built up with small antiquated houses,

I saw three fat hogs lying asleep, and a boy (also asleep)

taking care of them.  From queer old-fashioned windows

along the curve projected boxes of bright flowers, and over

the edge of one of these boxes hung the head and shoulders

of a cat--asleep. The five sleeping creatures were the

only living things visible in that street.  There was not

a sound; absolute stillness prevailed.  It was Sunday;

one is not used to such dreamy Sundays on the continent.

In our part of the town it was different that night.

A regiment of brown and battered soldiers had arrived home

from Algiers, and I judged they got thirsty on the way.

They sang and drank till dawn, in the pleasant open air.



We left for Turin at ten the next morning by a railway which

was profusely decorated with tunnels.  We forgot to take

a lantern along, consequently we missed all the scenery.

Our compartment was full.  A ponderous tow-headed Swiss woman,

who put on many fine-lady airs, but was evidently more

used to washing linen than wearing it, sat in a corner

seat and put her legs across into the opposite one,

propping them intermediately with her up-ended valise.

In the seat thus pirated, sat two Americans, greatly incommoded

by that woman's majestic coffin-clad feet.  One of them

begged, politely, to remove them.  She opened her wide eyes

and gave him a stare, but answered nothing.  By and by he

proferred his request again, with great respectfulness.

She said, in good English, and in a deeply offended tone,

that she had paid her passage and was not going to be

bullied out of her "rights" by ill-bred foreigners,

even if she was alone and unprotected.



"But I have rights, also, madam.  My ticket entitles me

to a seat, but you are occupying half of it."



"I will not talk with you, sir.  What right have you

to speak to me? I do not know you.  One would know

you came from a land where there are no gentlemen.

No GENTLEMAN would treat a lady as you have treated me."



"I come from a region where a lady would hardly give me

the same provocation."



"You have insulted me, sir! You have intimated that I am

not a lady--and I hope I am NOT one, after the pattern

of your country."



"I beg that you will give yourself no alarm on that head,

madam; but at the same time I must insist--always

respectfully--that you let me have my seat."



Here the fragile laundress burst into tears and sobs.



"I never was so insulted before! Never, never! It

is shameful, it is brutal, it is base, to bully and abuse

an unprotected lady who has lost the use of her limbs

and cannot put her feet to the floor without agony!"



"Good heavens, madam, why didn't you say that at first! I

offer a thousand pardons.  And I offer them most sincerely.

I did not know--I COULD not know--anything was the matter.

You are most welcome to the seat, and would have been

from the first if I had only known.  I am truly sorry it

all happened, I do assure you."



But he couldn't get a word of forgiveness out of her.

She simply sobbed and sniffed in a subdued but wholly

unappeasable way for two long hours, meantime crowding

the man more than ever with her undertaker-furniture

and paying no sort of attention to his frequent and

humble little efforts to do something for her comfort.

Then the train halted at the Italian line and she hopped

up and marched out of the car with as firm a leg as any

washerwoman of all her tribe! And how sick I was, to see

how she had fooled me.



Turin is a very fine city.  In the matter of roominess

it transcends anything that was ever dreamed of before,

I fancy.  It sits in the midst of a vast dead-level, and one

is obliged to imagine that land may be had for the asking,

and no taxes to pay, so lavishly do they use it.

The streets are extravagantly wide, the paved squares

are prodigious, the houses are huge and handsome,

and compacted into uniform blocks that stretch away as

straight as an arrow, into the distance.  The sidewalks

are about as wide as ordinary European STREETS, and are

covered over with a double arcade supported on great stone

piers or columns.  One walks from one end to the other

of these spacious streets, under shelter all the time,

and all his course is lined with the prettiest of shops

and the most inviting dining-houses.



There is a wide and lengthy court, glittering with the

most wickedly enticing shops, which is roofed with glass,

high aloft overhead, and paved with soft-toned marbles

laid in graceful figures; and at night when the place

is brilliant with gas and populous with a sauntering

and chatting and laughing multitude of pleasure-seekers,

it is a spectacle worth seeing.



Everything is on a large scale; the public buildings,

for instance--and they are architecturally imposing,

too, as well as large.  The big squares have big bronze

monuments in them.  At the hotel they gave us rooms

that were alarming, for size, and parlor to match.

It was well the weather required no fire in the parlor,

for I think one might as well have tried to warm a park.

The place would have a warm look, though, in any weather,

for the window-curtains were of red silk damask,

and the walls were covered with the same fire-hued

goods--so, also, were the four sofas and the brigade

of chairs.  The furniture, the ornaments, the chandeliers,

the carpets, were all new and bright and costly.

We did not need a parlor at all, but they said it belonged

to the two bedrooms and we might use it if we chose.

Since it was to cost nothing, we were not averse to using it,

of course.



Turin must surely read a good deal, for it has more

book-stores to the square rod than any other town I

know of.  And it has its own share of military folk.

The Italian officers' uniforms are very much the most

beautiful I have ever seen; and, as a general thing,

the men in them were as handsome as the clothes.  They were

not large men, but they had fine forms, fine features,

rich olive complexions, and lustrous black eyes.



For several weeks I had been culling all the information

I could about Italy, from tourists.  The tourists were

all agreed upon one thing--one must expect to be cheated

at every turn by the Italians.  I took an evening walk

in Turin, and presently came across a little Punch and Judy

show in one of the great squares.  Twelve or fifteen

people constituted the audience.  This miniature theater

was not much bigger than a man's coffin stood on end;

the upper part was open and displayed a tinseled

parlor--a good-sized handkerchief would have answered

for a drop-curtain; the footlights consisted of a couple

of candle-ends an inch long; various manikins the size

of dolls appeared on the stage and made long speeches at

each other, gesticulating a good deal, and they generally

had a fight before they got through.  They were worked

by strings from above, and the illusion was not perfect,

for one saw not only the strings but the brawny hand

that manipulated them--and the actors and actresses all

talked in the same voice, too.  The audience stood in front

of the theater, and seemed to enjoy the performance heartily.



When the play was done, a youth in his shirt-sleeves started

around with a small copper saucer to make a collection.

I did not know how much to put in, but thought I would

be guided by my predecessors.  Unluckily, I only had two

of these, and they did not help me much because they

did not put in anything.  I had no Italian money,

so I put in a small Swiss coin worth about ten cents.

The youth finished his collection trip and emptied

the result on the stage; he had some very animated talk

with the concealed manager, then he came working his

way through the little crowd--seeking me, I thought.

I had a mind to slip away, but concluded I wouldn't;

I would stand my ground, and confront the villainy,

whatever it was.  The youth stood before me and held

up that Swiss coin, sure enough, and said something.

I did not understand him, but I judged he was requiring

Italian money of me.  The crowd gathered close,

to listen.  I was irritated, and said--in English,

of course:



"I know it's Swiss, but you'll take that or none.

I haven't any other."



He tried to put the coin in my hand, and spoke again.

I drew my hand away, and said:



"NO, sir.  I know all about you people.  You can't play

any of your fraudful tricks on me.  If there is a discount

on that coin, I am sorry, but I am not going to make

it good.  I noticed that some of the audience didn't pay

you anything at all.  You let them go, without a word,

but you come after me because you think I'm a stranger

and will put up with an extortion rather than have a scene.

But you are mistaken this time--you'll take that Swiss

money or none."



The youth stood there with the coin in his fingers,

nonplused and bewildered; of course he had not understood

a word.  An English-speaking Italian spoke up, now, and said:



"You are misunderstanding the boy.  He does not mean any harm.

He did not suppose you gave him so much money purposely,

so he hurried back to return you the coin lest you

might get away before you discovered your mistake.

Take it, and give him a penny--that will make everything

smooth again."



I probably blushed, then, for there was occasion.

Through the interpreter I begged the boy's pardon,

but I nobly refused to take back the ten cents.  I said

I was accustomed to squandering large sums in that way

--it was the kind of person I was.  Then I retired to make

a note to the effect that in Italy persons connected

with the drama do not cheat.



The episode with the showman reminds me of a dark chapter

in my history.  I once robbed an aged and blind beggar-woman

of four dollars--in a church.  It happened this way.

When I was out with the Innocents Abroad, the ship

stopped in the Russian port of Odessa and I went ashore,

with others, to view the town.  I got separated from the rest,

and wandered about alone, until late in the afternoon,

when I entered a Greek church to see what it was like.

When I was ready to leave, I observed two wrinkled old

women standing stiffly upright against the inner wall,

near the door, with their brown palms open to receive alms.

I contributed to the nearer one, and passed out.

I had gone fifty yards, perhaps, when it occurred to me

that I must remain ashore all night, as I had heard

that the ship's business would carry her away at four

o'clock and keep her away until morning.  It was a little

after four now.  I had come ashore with only two pieces

of money, both about the same size, but differing largely

in value--one was a French gold piece worth four dollars,

the other a Turkish coin worth two cents and a half.

With a sudden and horrified misgiving, I put my hand in

my pocket, now, and sure enough, I fetched out that Turkish

penny!



Here was a situation.  A hotel would require pay in

advance --I must walk the street all night, and perhaps

be arrested as a suspicious character.  There was but one

way out of the difficulty--I flew back to the church,

and softly entered.  There stood the old woman yet,

and in the palm of the nearest one still lay my gold piece.

I was grateful.  I crept close, feeling unspeakably mean;

I got my Turkish penny ready, and was extending a trembling

hand to make the nefarious exchange, when I heard a cough

behind me.  I jumped back as if I had been accused,

and stood quaking while a worshiper entered and passed up

the aisle.



I was there a year trying to steal that money; that is,

it seemed a year, though, of course, it must have been

much less.  The worshipers went and came; there were hardly

ever three in the church at once, but there was always one

or more.  Every time I tried to commit my crime somebody

came in or somebody started out, and I was prevented;

but at last my opportunity came; for one moment there

was nobody in the church but the two beggar-women and me.

I whipped the gold piece out of the poor old pauper's palm

and dropped my Turkish penny in its place.  Poor old thing,

she murmured her thanks--they smote me to the heart.

Then I sped away in a guilty hurry, and even when I was a mile

from the church I was still glancing back, every moment,

to see if I was being pursued.



That experience has been of priceless value and benefit

to me; for I resolved then, that as long as I lived I

would never again rob a blind beggar-woman in a church;

and I have always kept my word.  The most permanent lessons

in morals are those which come, not of booky teaching,

but of experience.







CHAPTER XLVIII

[Beauty of Women--and of Old Masters]



In Milan we spent most of our time in the vast and

beautiful Arcade or Gallery, or whatever it is called.

Blocks of tall new buildings of the most sumptuous sort,

rich with decoration and graced with statues, the streets

between these blocks roofed over with glass at a great height,

the pavements all of smooth and variegated marble,

arranged in tasteful patterns--little tables all over these

marble streets, people sitting at them, eating, drinking,

or smoking--crowds of other people strolling by--such

is the Arcade.  I should like to live in it all the time.

The windows of the sumptuous restaurants stand open,

and one breakfasts there and enjoys the passing show.



We wandered all over the town, enjoying whatever was going

on in the streets.  We took one omnibus ride, and as I

did not speak Italian and could not ask the price, I held

out some copper coins to the conductor, and he took two.

Then he went and got his tariff card and showed me that he

had taken only the right sum.  So I made a note--Italian

omnibus conductors do not cheat.



Near the Cathedral I saw another instance of probity.

An old man was peddling dolls and toy fans.  Two small

American children and one gave the old man a franc

and three copper coins, and both started away; but they

were called back, and the franc and one of the coppers

were restored to them.  Hence it is plain that in Italy,

parties connected with the drama and the omnibus and the toy

interests do not cheat.



The stocks of goods in the shops were not extensive, generally.

In the vestibule of what seemed to be a clothing store,

we saw eight or ten wooden dummies grouped together,

clothed in woolen business suits and each marked with its price.

One suit was marked forty-five francs--nine dollars.

Harris stepped in and said he wanted a suit like that.

Nothing easier: the old merchant dragged in the dummy,

brushed him off with a broom, stripped him, and shipped

the clothes to the hotel.  He said he did not keep two

suits of the same kind in stock, but manufactured a second

when it was needed to reclothe the dummy.



In another quarter we found six Italians engaged

in a violent quarrel.  They danced fiercely about,

gesticulating with their heads, their arms, their legs,

their whole bodies; they would rush forward occasionally

with a sudden access of passion and shake their fists

in each other's very faces.  We lost half an hour there,

waiting to help cord up the dead, but they finally embraced

each other affectionately, and the trouble was over.

The episode was interesting, but we could not have afforded

all the time to it if we had known nothing was going

to come of it but a reconciliation.  Note made--in Italy,

people who quarrel cheat the spectator.



We had another disappointment afterward.  We approached

a deeply interested crowd, and in the midst of it

found a fellow wildly chattering and gesticulating

over a box on the ground which was covered with a piece

of old blanket.  Every little while he would bend down

and take hold of the edge of the blanket with the extreme

tips of his fingertips, as if to show there was no

deception--chattering away all the while--but always,

just as I was expecting to see a wonder feat of legerdemain,

he would let go the blanket and rise to explain further.

However, at last he uncovered the box and got out a spoon

with a liquid in it, and held it fair and frankly around,

for people to see that it was all right and he was taking

no advantage--his chatter became more excited than ever.

I supposed he was going to set fire to the liquid and

swallow it, so I was greatly wrought up and interested.

I got a cent ready in one hand and a florin in the other,

intending to give him the former if he survived and the

latter if he killed himself--for his loss would be my gain

in a literary way, and I was willing to pay a fair price

for the item --but this impostor ended his intensely

moving performance by simply adding some powder to the

liquid and polishing the spoon! Then he held it aloft,

and he could not have shown a wilder exultation if he

had achieved an immortal miracle.  The crowd applauded

in a gratified way, and it seemed to me that history

speaks the truth when it says these children of the south

are easily entertained.



We spent an impressive hour in the noble cathedral, where long

shafts of tinted light were cleaving through the solemn

dimness from the lofty windows and falling on a pillar here,

a picture there, and a kneeling worshiper yonder.

The organ was muttering, censers were swinging, candles were

glinting on the distant altar and robed priests were

filing silently past them; the scene was one to sweep all

frivolous thoughts away and steep the soul in a holy calm.

A trim young American lady paused a yard or two from me,

fixed her eyes on the mellow sparks flecking the far-off altar,

bent her head reverently a moment, then straightened up,

kicked her train into the air with her heel, caught it

deftly in her hand, and marched briskly out.



We visited the picture-galleries and the other regulation

"sights"

of Milan--not because I wanted to write about them again,

but to see if I had learned anything in twelve years.

I afterward visited the great galleries of Rome and

Florence for the same purpose.  I found I had learned

one thing.  When I wrote about the Old Masters before,

I said the copies were better than the originals.

That was a mistake of large dimensions.  The Old Masters

were still unpleasing to me, but they were truly divine

contrasted with the copies.  The copy is to the original

as the pallid, smart, inane new wax-work group is to

the vigorous, earnest, dignified group of living men

and women whom it professes to duplicate.  There is a

mellow richness, a subdued color, in the old pictures,

which is to the eye what muffled and mellowed sound

is to the ear.  That is the merit which is most loudly

praised in the old picture, and is the one which the copy

most conspicuously lacks, and which the copyist must

not hope to compass.  It was generally conceded by the

artists with whom I talked, that that subdued splendor,

that mellow richness, is imparted to the picture by AGE.

Then why should we worship the Old Master for it,

who didn't impart it, instead of worshiping Old Time,

who did? Perhaps the picture was a clanging bell,

until Time muffled it and sweetened it.



In conversation with an artist in Venice, I asked: "What

is it that people see in the Old Masters? I have been in the

Doge's palace and I saw several acres of very bad drawing,

very bad perspective, and very incorrect proportions.

Paul Veronese's dogs to not resemble dogs; all the horses

look like bladders on legs; one man had a RIGHT leg on

the left side of his body; in the large picture where

the Emperor (Barbarossa?) is prostrate before the Pope,

there are three men in the foreground who are over

thirty feet high, if one may judge by the size of a

kneeling little boy in the center of the foreground;

and according to the same scale, the Pope is seven feet

high and the Doge is a shriveled dwarf of four feet."



The artist said:



"Yes, the Old Masters often drew badly; they did not

care much for truth and exactness in minor details;

but after all, in spite of bad drawing, bad perspective,

bad proportions, and a choice of subjects which no longer

appeal to people as strongly as they did three hundred

years ago, there is a SOMETHING about their pictures

which is divine--a something which is above and beyond

the art of any epoch since--a something which would be

the despair of artists but that they never hope or expect

to attain it, and therefore do not worry about it."



That is what he said--and he said what he believed;

and not only believed, but felt.



Reasoning--especially reasoning, without technical

knowledge--must be put aside, in cases of this kind.

It cannot assist the inquirer.  It will lead him,

in the most logical progression, to what, in the eyes

of artists, would be a most illogical conclusion.

Thus: bad drawing, bad proportion, bad perspective,

indifference to truthful detail, color which gets its

merit from time, and not from the artist--these things

constitute the Old Master; conclusion, the Old Master

was a bad painter, the Old Master was not an Old Master

at all, but an Old Apprentice.  Your friend the artist

will grant your premises, but deny your conclusion;

he will maintain that notwithstanding this formidable

list of confessed defects, there is still a something

that is divine and unapproachable about the Old Master,

and that there is no arguing the fact away by any system of

reasoning whatsoever.



I can believe that.  There are women who have an

indefinable charm in their faces which makes them

beautiful to their intimates, but a cold stranger

who tried to reason the matter out and find this beauty

would fail.  He would say to one of these women: This

chin is too short, this nose is too long, this forehead

is too high, this hair is too red, this complexion is

too pallid, the perspective of the entire composition

is incorrect; conclusion, the woman is not beautiful.

But her nearest friend might say, and say truly,

"Your premises are right, your logic is faultless,

but your conclusion is wrong, nevertheless; she is an Old

Master--she is beautiful, but only to such as know her;

it is a beauty which cannot be formulated, but it is there, just

the same."



I found more pleasure in contemplating the Old Masters

this time than I did when I was in Europe in former years,

but still it was a calm pleasure; there was nothing

overheated about it.  When I was in Venice before,

I think I found no picture which stirred me much,

but this time there were two which enticed me to the Doge's

palace day after day, and kept me there hours at a time.

One of these was Tintoretto's three-acre picture in the

Great Council Chamber.  When I saw it twelve years ago I

was not strongly attracted to it--the guide told me it

was an insurrection in heaven--but this was an error.



The movement of this great work is very fine.  There are

ten thousand figures, and they are all doing something.

There is a wonderful "go" to the whole composition.

Some of the figures are driving headlong downward,

with clasped hands, others are swimming through the

cloud-shoals--some on their faces, some on their backs--great

processions of bishops, martyrs, and angels are pouring swiftly

centerward from various outlying directions--everywhere

is enthusiastic joy, there is rushing movement everywhere.

There are fifteen or twenty figures scattered here and there,

with books, but they cannot keep their attention on

their reading--they offer the books to others, but no

one wishes to read, now.  The Lion of St. Mark is there

with his book; St. Mark is there with his pen uplifted;

he and the Lion are looking each other earnestly in the face,

disputing about the way to spell a word--the Lion

looks up in rapt admiration while St. Mark spells.

This is wonderfully interpreted by the artist.

It is the master-stroke of this imcomparable painting.

[Figure 10]



I visited the place daily, and never grew tired of

looking at that grand picture.  As I have intimated,

the movement is almost unimaginable vigorous; the figures

are singing, hosannahing, and many are blowing trumpets.

So vividly is noise suggested, that spectators who become

absorbed in the picture almost always fall to shouting

comments in each other's ears, making ear-trumpets of their

curved hands, fearing they may not otherwise be heard.

One often sees a tourist, with the eloquent tears pouring

down his cheeks, funnel his hands at his wife's ear,

and hears him roar through them, "OH, TO BE THERE AND

AT REST!"



None but the supremely great in art can produce effects

like these with the silent brush.



Twelve years ago I could not have appreciated this picture.

One year ago I could not have appreciated it.  My study

of Art in Heidelberg has been a noble education to me.

All that I am today in Art, I owe to that.



The other great work which fascinated me was Bassano's

immortal Hair Trunk.  This is in the Chamber of the Council

of Ten.  It is in one of the three forty-foot pictures

which decorate the walls of the room.  The composition

of this picture is beyond praise.  The Hair Trunk is not

hurled at the stranger's head--so to speak--as the chief

feature of an immortal work so often is; no, it is

carefully guarded from prominence, it is subordinated,

it is restrained, it is most deftly and cleverly held

in reserve, it is most cautiously and ingeniously led up to,

by the master, and consequently when the spectator reaches

it at last, he is taken unawares, he is unprepared,

and it bursts upon him with a stupefying surprise.



One is lost in wonder at all the thought and care which

this elaborate planning must have cost.  A general glance

at the picture could never suggest that there was a hair

trunk in it; the Hair Trunk is not mentioned in the title

even--which is, "Pope Alexander III.  and the Doge Ziani,

the Conqueror of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa";

you see, the title is actually utilized to help

divert attention from the Trunk; thus, as I say,

nothing suggests the presence of the Trunk, by any hint,

yet everything studiedly leads up to it, step by step.

Let us examine into this, and observe the exquisitely

artful artlessness of the plan.



At the extreme left end of the picture are a couple of women,

one of them with a child looking over her shoulder at

a wounded man sitting with bandaged head on the ground.

These people seem needless, but no, they are there

for a purpose; one cannot look at them without seeing

the gorgeous procession of grandees, bishops, halberdiers,

and banner-bearers which is passing along behind them;

one cannot see the procession without feeling the curiosity

to follow it and learn whither it is going; it leads him

to the Pope, in the center of the picture, who is talking

with the bonnetless Doge--talking tranquilly, too,

although within twelve feet of them a man is beating a drum,

and not far from the drummer two persons are blowing horns,

and many horsemen are plunging and rioting about--indeed,

twenty-two feet of this great work is all a deep and

happy holiday serenity and Sunday-school procession,

and then we come suddenly upon eleven and one-half feet

of turmoil and racket and insubordination.  This latter

state of things is not an accident, it has its purpose.

But for it, one would linger upon the Pope and the Doge,

thinking them to be the motive and supreme feature of

the picture; whereas one is drawn along, almost unconsciously,

to see what the trouble is about.  Now at the very END

of this riot, within four feet of the end of the picture,

and full thirty-six feet from the beginning of it,

the Hair Trunk bursts with an electrifying suddenness

upon the spectator, in all its matchless perfection,

and the great master's triumph is sweeping and complete.

From that moment no other thing in those forty feet of canvas

has any charm; one sees the Hair Trunk, and the Hair Trunk

only--and to see it is to worship it.  Bassano even placed

objects in the immediate vicinity of the Supreme Feature

whose pretended purpose was to divert attention from it yet

a little longer and thus delay and augment the surprise;

for instance, to the right of it he has placed a stooping

man with a cap so red that it is sure to hold the eye

for a moment--to the left of it, some six feet away,

he has placed a red-coated man on an inflated horse,

and that coat plucks your eye to that locality the next

moment--then, between the Trunk and the red horseman he

has intruded a man, naked to his waist, who is carrying

a fancy flour-sack on the middle of his back instead

of on his shoulder--this admirable feat interests you,

of course--keeps you at bay a little longer, like a sock

or a jacket thrown to the pursuing wolf--but at last,

in spite of all distractions and detentions, the eye

of even the most dull and heedless spectator is sure

to fall upon the World's Masterpiece, and in that

moment he totters to his chair or leans upon his guide

for support.



Descriptions of such a work as this must necessarily

be imperfect, yet they are of value.  The top of the Trunk

is arched; the arch is a perfect half-circle, in the Roman

style of architecture, for in the then rapid decadence

of Greek art, the rising influence of Rome was already

beginning to be felt in the art of the Republic.

The Trunk is bound or bordered with leather all around

where the lid joins the main body.  Many critics consider

this leather too cold in tone; but I consider this

its highest merit, since it was evidently made so to

emphasize by contrast the impassioned fervor of the hasp.

The highlights in this part of the work are cleverly managed,

the MOTIF is admirably subordinated to the ground tints,

and the technique is very fine.  The brass nail-heads

are in the purest style of the early Renaissance.

The strokes, here, are very firm and bold--every nail-head

is a portrait.  The handle on the end of the Trunk has

evidently been retouched--I think, with a piece of chalk

--but one can still see the inspiration of the Old Master

in the tranquil, almost too tranquil, hang of it.  The hair

of this Trunk is REAL hair--so to speak--white in patched,

brown in patches.  The details are finely worked out;

the repose proper to hair in a recumbent and inactive

attitude is charmingly expressed.  There is a feeling

about this part of the work which lifts it to the highest

altitudes of art; the sense of sordid realism vanishes

away--one recognizes that there is SOUL here.



View this Trunk as you will, it is a gem, it is a marvel,

it is a miracle.  Some of the effects are very daring,

approaching even to the boldest flights of the rococo,

the sirocco, and the Byzantine schools--yet the master's hand

never falters--it moves on, calm, majestic, confident--and,

with that art which conceals art, it finally casts over

the TOUT ENSEMBLE, by mysterious methods of its own,

a subtle something which refines, subdues, etherealizes the

arid components and endures them with the deep charm

and gracious witchery of poesy.



Among the art-treasures of Europe there are pictures

which approach the Hair Trunk--there are two which may

be said to equal it, possibly--but there is none that

surpasses it.  So perfect is the Hair Trunk that it moves

even persons who ordinarily have no feeling for art.

When an Erie baggagemaster saw it two years ago, he could

hardly keep from checking it; and once when a customs

inspector was brought into its presence, he gazed upon

it in silent rapture for some moments, then slowly

and unconsciously placed one hand behind him with the

palm uppermost, and got out his chalk with the other.

These facts speak for themselves.







CHAPTER XLIX

[Hanged with a Golden Rope]



One lingers about the Cathedral a good deal, in Venice.

There is a strong fascination about it--partly because

it is so old, and partly because it is so ugly.

Too many of the world's famous buildings fail of one

chief virtue--harmony; they are made up of a methodless

mixture of the ugly and the beautiful; this is bad;

it is confusing, it is unrestful.  One has a sense

of uneasiness, of distress, without knowing why.  But one

is calm before St. Mark's, one is calm in the cellar;

for its details are masterfully ugly, no misplaced

and impertinent beauties are intruded anywhere; and the

consequent result is a grand harmonious whole, of soothing,

entrancing, tranquilizing, soul-satisfying ugliness.

One's admiration of a perfect thing always grows,

never declines; and this is the surest evidence to him

that it IS perfect.  St. Mark's is perfect.  To me it

soon grew to be so nobly, so augustly ugly, that it was

difficult to stay away from it, even for a little while.

Every time its squat domes disappeared from my view,

I had a despondent feeling; whenever they reappeared,

I felt an honest rapture--I have not known any happier hours

than those I daily spent in front of Florian's, looking

across the Great Square at it.  Propped on its long row

of low thick-legged columns, its back knobbed with domes,

it seemed like a vast warty bug taking a meditative walk.



St. Mark's is not the oldest building in the world, of course,

but it seems the oldest, and looks the oldest--especially inside.



When the ancient mosaics in its walls become damaged,

they are repaired but not altered; the grotesque old

pattern is preserved.  Antiquity has a charm of its own,

and to smarten it up would only damage it.  One day I

was sitting on a red marble bench in the vestibule looking

up at an ancient piece of apprentice-work, in mosaic,

illustrative of the command to "multiply and replenish

the earth." The Cathedral itself had seemed very old;

but this picture was illustrating a period in history

which made the building seem young by comparison.

But I presently found an antique which was older than either

the battered Cathedral or the date assigned to the piece

of history; it was a spiral-shaped fossil as large as

the crown of a hat; it was embedded in the marble bench,

and had been sat upon by tourists until it was worn smooth.

Contrasted with the inconceivable antiquity of this

modest fossil, those other things were flippantly

modern--jejune--mere matters of day-before-yesterday.

The sense of the oldness of the Cathedral vanished away

under the influence of this truly venerable presence.



St. Mark's is monumental; it is an imperishable remembrancer

of the profound and simply piety of the Middle Ages.

Whoever could ravish a column from a pagan temple,

did it and contributed his swag to this Christian one.

So this fane is upheld by several hundred acquisitions

procured in that peculiar way.  In our day it would be

immoral to go on the highway to get bricks for a church,

but it was no sin in the old times.  St. Mark's was itself

the victim of a curious robbery once.  The thing is set

down in the history of Venice, but it might be smuggled

into the Arabian Nights and not seem out of place

there:



Nearly four hundred and fifty years ago, a Candian

named Stammato, in the suite of a prince of the house

of Este, was allowed to view the riches of St. Mark's.

His sinful eye was dazzled and he hid himself behind

an altar, with an evil purpose in his heart, but a priest

discovered him and turned him out.  Afterward he got

in again--by false keys, this time.  He went there,

night after night, and worked hard and patiently, all alone,

overcoming difficulty after difficulty with his toil,

and at last succeeded in removing a great brick of the marble

paneling which walled the lower part of the treasury;

this block he fixed so that he could take it out and put

it in at will.  After that, for weeks, he spent all

his midnights in his magnificent mine, inspecting it

in security, gloating over its marvels at his leisure,

and always slipping back to his obscure lodgings before dawn,

with a duke's ransom under his cloak.  He did not need

to grab, haphazard, and run--there was no hurry.

He could make deliberate and well-considered selections;

he could consult his esthetic tastes.  One comprehends

how undisturbed he was, and how safe from any danger

of interruption, when it is stated that he even carried off

a unicorn's horn--a mere curiosity--which would not pass

through the egress entire, but had to be sawn in two

--a bit of work which cost him hours of tedious labor.

He continued to store up his treasures at home until his

occupation lost the charm of novelty and became monotonous;

then he ceased from it, contented.  Well he might be;

for his collection, raised to modern values, represented nearly

fifty million dollars!



He could have gone home much the richest citizen of his country,

and it might have been years before the plunder was missed;

but he was human--he could not enjoy his delight alone,

he must have somebody to talk about it with.  So he

exacted a solemn oath from a Candian noble named Crioni,

then led him to his lodgings and nearly took his breath

away with a sight of his glittering hoard.  He detected

a look in his friend's face which excited his suspicion,

and was about to slip a stiletto into him when Crioni

saved himself by explaining that that look was only

an expression of supreme and happy astonishment.

Stammato made Crioni a present of one of the state's

principal jewels--a huge carbuncle, which afterward

figured in the Ducal cap of state--and the pair parted.

Crioni went at once to the palace, denounced the criminal,

and handed over the carbuncle as evidence.

Stammato was arrested, tried, and condemned, with the

old-time Venetian promptness.  He was hanged between

the two great columns in the Piazza--with a gilded rope,

out of compliment to his love of gold, perhaps.  He got

no good of his booty at all--it was ALL recovered.



In Venice we had a luxury which very seldom fell to our lot

on the continent--a home dinner with a private family.

If one could always stop with private families,

when traveling, Europe would have a charm which it

now lacks.  As it is, one must live in the hotels,

of course, and that is a sorrowful business.

A man accustomed to American food and American domestic

cookery would not starve to death suddenly in Europe;

but I think he would gradually waste away, and eventually die.



He would have to do without his accustomed morning meal.

That is too formidable a change altogether; he would

necessarily suffer from it.  He could get the shadow,

the sham, the base counterfeit of that meal; but it would

do him no good, and money could not buy the reality.



To particularize: the average American's simplest and

commonest form of breakfast consists of coffee and beefsteak;

well, in Europe, coffee is an unknown beverage.  You can

get what the European hotel-keeper thinks is coffee, but it

resembles the real thing as hypocrisy resembles holiness.

It is a feeble, characterless, uninspiring sort of stuff,

and almost as undrinkable as if it had been made in an

American hotel.  The milk used for it is what the French

call "Christian" milk--milk which has been baptized.



After a few months' acquaintance with European "coffee,"

one's mind weakens, and his faith with it, and he begins

to wonder if the rich beverage of home, with its clotted

layer of yellow cream on top of it, is not a mere dream,

after all, and a thing which never existed.



Next comes the European bread--fair enough, good enough,

after a fashion, but cold; cold and tough, and unsympathetic;

and never any change, never any variety--always the same

tiresome thing.



Next, the butter--the sham and tasteless butter; no salt

in it, and made of goodness knows what.



Then there is the beefsteak.  They have it in Europe, but they

don't know how to cook it.  Neither will they cut it right.

It comes on the table in a small, round pewter platter.

It lies in the center of this platter, in a bordering

bed of grease-soaked potatoes; it is the size, shape,

and thickness of a man's hand with the thumb and fingers

cut off.  It is a little overdone, is rather dry,

it tastes pretty insipidly, it rouses no enthusiasm.



Imagine a poor exile contemplating that inert thing;

and imagine an angel suddenly sweeping down out of a better

land and setting before him a mighty porterhouse steak an

inch and a half thick, hot and sputtering from the griddle;

dusted with a fragrant pepper; enriched with little

melting bits of butter of the most unimpeachable freshness

and genuineness; the precious juices of the meat trickling

out and joining the gravy, archipelagoed with mushrooms;

a township or two of tender, yellowish fat gracing

an outlying district of this ample county of beefsteak;

the long white bone which divides the sirloin from the

tenderloin still in its place; and imagine that the angel

also adds a great cup of American home-made coffee,

with a cream a-froth on top, some real butter, firm and

yellow and fresh, some smoking hot-biscuits, a plate

of hot buckwheat cakes, with transparent syrup--could

words describe the gratitude of this exile?



The European dinner is better than the European breakfast,

but it has its faults and inferiorities; it does not satisfy.

He comes to the table eager and hungry; he swallows his

soup--there is an undefinable lack about it somewhere;

thinks the fish is going to be the thing he wants

--eats it and isn't sure; thinks the next dish is perhaps

the one that will hit the hungry place--tries it,

and is conscious that there was a something wanting

about it, also.  And thus he goes on, from dish to dish,

like a boy after a butterfly which just misses getting

caught every time it alights, but somehow doesn't get caught

after all; and at the end the exile and the boy have fared

about alike; the one is full, but grievously unsatisfied,

the other has had plenty of exercise, plenty of interest,

and a fine lot of hopes, but he hasn't got any butterfly.

There is here and there an American who will say he can remember

rising from a European table d'ho^te perfectly satisfied;

but we must not overlook the fact that there is also here

and there an American who will lie.



The number of dishes is sufficient; but then it is such

a monotonous variety of UNSTRIKING dishes.  It is an inane

dead-level of "fair-to-middling." There is nothing to

ACCENT it.  Perhaps if the roast of mutton or of beef--a big,

generous one--were brought on the table and carved in full

view of the client, that might give the right sense of

earnestness and reality to the thing; but they don't do that,

they pass the sliced meat around on a dish, and so you

are perfectly calm, it does not stir you in the least.

Now a vast roast turkey, stretched on the broad of his back,

with his heels in the air and the rich juices oozing

from his fat sides ... but I may as well stop there,

for they would not know how to cook him.  They can't

even cook a chicken respectably; and as for carving it,

they do that with a hatchet.



This is about the customary table d'ho^te bill in summer:



Soup (characterless).



Fish--sole, salmon, or whiting--usually tolerably good.



Roast--mutton or beef--tasteless--and some last year's potatoes.



A pa^te, or some other made dish--usually good--"considering."



One vegetable--brought on in state, and all alone--usually

insipid lentils, or string-beans, or indifferent asparagus.



Roast chicken, as tasteless as paper.



Lettuce-salad--tolerably good.



Decayed strawberries or cherries.



Sometimes the apricots and figs are fresh, but this is

no advantage, as these fruits are of no account anyway.



The grapes are generally good, and sometimes there

is a tolerably good peach, by mistake.



The variations of the above bill are trifling.  After a

fortnight one discovers that the variations are only apparent,

not real; in the third week you get what you had the first,

and in the fourth the week you get what you had the second.

Three or four months of this weary sameness will kill

the robustest appetite.



It has now been many months, at the present writing,

since I have had a nourishing meal, but I shall soon

have one--a modest, private affair, all to myself.

I have selected a few dishes, and made out a little bill

of fare, which will go home in the steamer that precedes me,

and be hot when I arrive--as follows:



Radishes. Baked apples, with cream

Fried oysters; stewed oysters. Frogs.

American coffee, with real cream.

American butter.

Fried chicken, Southern style.

Porter-house steak.

Saratoga potatoes.

Broiled chicken, American style.

Hot biscuits, Southern style.

Hot wheat-bread, Southern style.

Hot buckwheat cakes.

American toast. Clear maple syrup.

Virginia bacon, broiled.

Blue points, on the half shell.

Cherry-stone clams.

San Francisco mussels, steamed.

Oyster soup.   Clam Soup.

Philadelphia Terapin soup.

Oysters roasted in shell-Northern style.

Soft-shell crabs.   Connecticut shad.

Baltimore perch.

Brook trout, from Sierra Nevadas.

Lake trout, from Tahoe.

Sheep-head and croakers, from New Orleans.

Black bass from the Mississippi.

American roast beef.

Roast turkey, Thanksgiving style.

Cranberry sauce. Celery.

Roast wild turkey.  Woodcock.

Canvas-back-duck, from Baltimore.

Prairie liens, from Illinois.

Missouri partridges, broiled.

'Possum. Coon.

Boston bacon and beans.

Bacon and greens, Southern style.

Hominy. Boiled onions. Turnips.

Pumpkin. Squash. Asparagus.

Butter beans.  Sweet potatoes.

Lettuce. Succotash. String beans.

Mashed potatoes. Catsup.

Boiled potatoes, in their skins.

New potatoes, minus the skins.

Early rose potatoes, roasted in the ashes, Southern style, served hot.

Sliced tomatoes, with sugar or vinegar. Stewed tomatoes.

Green corn, cut from the ear and served with butter and pepper.

Green corn, on the ear.

Hot corn-pone, with chitlings, Southern style.

Hot hoe-cake, Southern style.

Hot egg-bread, Southern style.

Hot light-bread, Southern style.

Buttermilk. Iced sweet milk.

Apple dumplings, with real cream.

Apple pie.  Apple fritters.

Apple puffs, Southern style.

Peach cobbler, Southern style

Peach pie.  American mince pie.

Pumpkin pie.  Squash pie.

All sorts of American pastry.



Fresh American fruits of all sorts, including strawberries which

are not to be doled out as if they were jewelry, but in a more

liberal way. Ice-water--not prepared in the ineffectual goblet,

but in the sincere and capable refrigerator.



Americans intending to spend a year or so in European hotels

will do well to copy this bill and carry it along.  They will

find it an excellent thing to get up an appetite with,

in the dispiriting presence of the squalid table d'ho^te.



Foreigners cannot enjoy our food, I suppose, any more than we

can enjoy theirs.  It is not strange; for tastes are made,

not born.  I might glorify my bill of fare until I was tired;

but after all, the Scotchman would shake his head and say,

"Where's your haggis?" and the Fijian would sigh and say,

"Where's your missionary?"



I have a neat talent in matters pertaining to nourishment.

This has met with professional recognition.  I have often

furnished recipes for cook-books. Here are some designs

for pies and things, which I recently prepared for a

friend's projected cook-book, but as I forgot to furnish

diagrams and perspectives, they had to be left out,

of course.



RECIPE FOR AN ASH-CAKE



Take a lot of water and add to it a lot of coarse

Indian-meal and about a quarter of a lot of salt.

Mix well together, knead into the form of a "pone," and let

the pone stand awhile--not on its edge, but the other way.

Rake away a place among the embers, lay it there,

and cover it an inch deep with hot ashes.  When it

is done, remove it; blow off all the ashes but one layer;

butter that one and eat.



N.B.--No household should ever be without this talisman.

It has been noticed that tramps never return for another

ash-cake.



----------



RECIPE FOR NEW ENGLISH PIE



To make this excellent breakfast dish, proceed as

follows: Take a sufficiency of water and a sufficiency

of flour, and construct a bullet-proof dough.

Work this into the form of a disk, with the edges turned

up some three-fourths of an inch.  Toughen and kiln-dry

in a couple days in a mild but unvarying temperature.

Construct a cover for this redoubt in the same way and

of the same material.  Fill with stewed dried apples;

aggravate with cloves, lemon-peel, and slabs of citron;

add two portions of New Orleans sugars, then solder

on the lid and set in a safe place till it petrifies.

Serve cold at breakfast and invite your enemy.



----------



RECIPE FOR GERMAN COFFEE



Take a barrel of water and bring it to a boil; rub a chicory

berry against a coffee berry, then convey the former

into the water.  Continue the boiling and evaporation

until the intensity of the flavor and aroma of the coffee

and chicory has been diminished to a proper degree;

then set aside to cool.  Now unharness the remains of a

once cow from the plow, insert them in a hydraulic press,

and when you shall have acquired a teaspoon of that

pale-blue juice which a German superstition regards

as milk, modify the malignity of its strength in a bucket

of tepid water and ring up the breakfast.  Mix the

beverage in a cold cup, partake with moderation, and keep

a wet rag around your head to guard against over-excitement.



----------



TO CARVE FOWLS IN THE GERMAN FASHION



Use a club, and avoid the joints.







CHAPTER L

[Titian Bad and Titian Good]



I wonder why some things are? For instance, Art is allowed

as much indecent license today as in earlier times

--but the privileges of Literature in this respect have been

sharply curtailed within the past eighty or ninety years.

Fielding and Smollett could portray the beastliness

of their day in the beastliest language; we have plenty

of foul subjects to deal with in our day, but we are

not allowed to approach them very near, even with nice

and guarded forms of speech.  But not so with Art.

The brush may still deal freely with any subject,

however revolting or indelicate.  It makes a body ooze

sarcasm at every pore, to go about Rome and Florence and see

what this last generation has been doing with the statues.

These works, which had stood in innocent nakedness for ages,

are all fig-leaved now.  Yes, every one of them.

Nobody noticed their nakedness before, perhaps; nobody can

help noticing it now, the fig-leaf makes it so conspicuous.

But the comical thing about it all, is, that the fig-leaf

is confined to cold and pallid marble, which would be still

cold and unsuggestive without this sham and ostentatious

symbol of modesty, whereas warm-blood paintings which do

really need it have in no case been furnished with it.



At the door of the Uffizzi, in Florence, one is confronted

by statues of a man and a woman, noseless, battered, black with

accumulated grime--they hardly suggest human beings

--yet these ridiculous creatures have been thoughtfully and

conscientiously fig-leaved by this fastidious generation.

You enter, and proceed to that most-visited little

gallery that exists in the world--the Tribune--and there,

against the wall, without obstructing rag or leaf,

you may look your fill upon the foulest, the vilest,

the obscenest picture the world possesses--Titian's Venus.

It isn't that she is naked and stretched out on a bed--no,

it is the attitude of one of her arms and hand.  If I

ventured to describe that attitude, there would be a fine

howl--but there the Venus lies, for anybody to gloat

over that wants to--and there she has a right to lie,

for she is a work of art, and Art has its privileges.

I saw young girls stealing furtive glances at her; I saw

young men gaze long and absorbedly at her; I saw aged,

infirm men hang upon her charms with a pathetic interest.

How I should like to describe her--just to see what a holy

indignation I could stir up in the world--just to hear

the unreflecting average man deliver himself about my

grossness and coarseness, and all that.  The world says

that no worded description of a moving spectacle is

a hundredth part as moving as the same spectacle seen

with one's own eyes--yet the world is willing to let its

son and its daughter and itself look at Titian's beast,

but won't stand a description of it in words.

Which shows that the world is not as consistent as it

might be.



There are pictures of nude women which suggest no impure

thought--I am well aware of that.  I am not railing

at such.  What I am trying to emphasize is the fact that

Titian's Venus is very far from being one of that sort.

Without any question it was painted for a bagnio and it

was probably refused because it was a trifle too strong.

In truth, it is too strong for any place but a public

Art Gallery.  Titian has two Venuses in the Tribune;

persons who have seen them will easily remember which one I am

referring to.



In every gallery in Europe there are hideous pictures

of blood, carnage, oozing brains, putrefaction--pictures

portraying intolerable suffering--pictures alive

with every conceivable horror, wrought out in dreadful

detail--and similar pictures are being put on the canvas

every day and publicly exhibited--without a growl from

anybody--for they are innocent, they are inoffensive,

being works of art.  But suppose a literary artist ventured

to go into a painstaking and elaborate description

of one of these grisly things--the critics would skin

him alive.  Well, let it go, it cannot be helped;

Art retains her privileges, Literature has lost hers.

Somebody else may cipher out the whys and the wherefores

and the consistencies of it--I haven't got time.



Titian's Venus defiles and disgraces the Tribune, there is

no softening that fact, but his "Moses" glorifies it.

The simple truthfulness of its noble work wins the heart

and the applause of every visitor, be he learned or ignorant.

After wearying one's self with the acres of stuffy,

sappy, expressionless babies that populate the canvases

of the Old Masters of Italy, it is refreshing to stand

before this peerless child and feel that thrill which tells

you you are at last in the presence of the real thing.

This is a human child, this is genuine.  You have seen him

a thousand times--you have seen him just as he is here

--and you confess, without reserve, that Titian WAS a Master.

The doll-faces of other painted babes may mean one thing,

they may mean another, but with the "Moses" the case

is different.  The most famous of all the art-critics

has said, "There is no room for doubt, here--plainly this

child is in trouble."



I consider that the "Moses" has no equal among the works

of the Old Masters, except it be the divine Hair Trunk

of Bassano.  I feel sure that if all the other Old Masters

were lost and only these two preserved, the world would

be the gainer by it.



My sole purpose in going to Florence was to see this

immortal "Moses," and by good fortune I was just in time,

for they were already preparing to remove it to a more

private and better-protected place because a fashion

of robbing the great galleries was prevailing in Europe

at the time.



I got a capable artist to copy the picture; Pannemaker,

the engraver of Dor'e's books, engraved it for me,

and I have the pleasure of laying it before the reader

in this volume.



We took a turn to Rome and some other Italian cities

--then to Munich, and thence to Paris--partly for exercise,

but mainly because these things were in our projected program,

and it was only right that we should be faithful to it.



From Paris I branched out and walked through Holland and Belgium,

procuring an occasional lift by rail or canal when tired,

and I had a tolerably good time of it "by and large."

I worked Spain and other regions through agents to save

time and shoe-leather.



We crossed to England, and then made the homeward

passage in the Cunarder GALLIA, a very fine ship.

I was glad to get home--immeasurably glad; so glad,

in fact, that it did not seem possible that anything

could ever get me out of the country again.  I had not

enjoyed a pleasure abroad which seemed to me to compare

with the pleasure I felt in seeing New York harbor again.

Europe has many advantages which we have not, but they

do not compensate for a good many still more valuable

ones which exist nowhere but in our own country.

Then we are such a homeless lot when we are over

there! So are Europeans themselves, for the matter.

They live in dark and chilly vast tombs--costly enough,

maybe, but without conveniences.  To be condemned to live

as the average European family lives would make life

a pretty heavy burden to the average American family.



On the whole, I think that short visits to Europe are

better for us than long ones.  The former preserve us from

becoming Europeanized; they keep our pride of country intact,

and at the same time they intensify our affection for our

country and our people; whereas long visits have the effect

of dulling those feelings--at least in the majority

of cases.  I think that one who mixes much with Americans

long resident abroad must arrive at this conclusion.











APPENDIX ----------



Nothing gives such weight and dignity to a book

as an Appendix.  HERODOTUS







APPENDIX A

The Portier



Omar Khay'am, the poet-prophet of Persia, writing more

than eight hundred years ago, has said:



"In the four parts of the earth are many that are able

to write learned books, many that are able to lead armies,

and many also that are able to govern kingdoms and empires;

but few there be that can keep a hotel."



A word about the European hotel PORTIER.  He is a most

admirable invention, a most valuable convenience.

He always wears a conspicuous uniform; he can always

be found when he is wanted, for he sticks closely to

his post at the front door; he is as polite as a duke;

he speaks from four to ten languages; he is your surest

help and refuge in time of trouble or perplexity.

He is not the clerk, he is not the landlord; he ranks above

the clerk, and represents the landlord, who is seldom seen.

Instead of going to the clerk for information, as we do at home,

you go to the portier.  It is the pride of our average

hotel clerk to know nothing whatever; it is the pride

of the portier to know everything.  You ask the portier

at what hours the trains leave--he tells you instantly;

or you ask him who is the best physician in town; or what

is the hack tariff; or how many children the mayor has;

or what days the galleries are open, and whether a permit

is required, and where you are to get it, and what you

must pay for it; or when the theaters open and close,

what the plays are to be, and the price of seats;

or what is the newest thing in hats; or how the bills

of mortality average; or "who struck Billy Patterson."

It does not matter what you ask him: in nine cases

out of ten he knows, and in the tenth case he will find

out for you before you can turn around three times.

There is nothing he will not put his hand to.  Suppose you

tell him you wish to go from Hamburg to Peking by the way

of Jericho, and are ignorant of routes and prices

--the next morning he will hand you a piece of paper with

the whole thing worked out on it to the last detail.

Before you have been long on European soil, you find

yourself still SAYING you are relying on Providence,

but when you come to look closer you will see that in reality

you are relying on the portier.  He discovers what is

puzzling you, or what is troubling you, or what your need is,

before you can get the half of it out, and he promptly says,

"Leave that to me." Consequently, you easily drift into

the habit of leaving everything to him.  There is a certain

embarrassment about applying to the average American

hotel clerk, a certain hesitancy, a sense of insecurity

against rebuff; but you feel no embarrassment in your

intercourse with the portier; he receives your propositions

with an enthusiasm which cheers, and plunges into their

accomplishment with an alacrity which almost inebriates.

The more requirements you can pile upon him, the better he

likes it.  Of course the result is that you cease from doing

anything for yourself.  He calls a hack when you want one;

puts you into it; tells the driver whither to take you;

receives you like a long-lost child when you return;

sends you about your business, does all the quarreling

with the hackman himself, and pays him his money out

of his own pocket.  He sends for your theater tickets,

and pays for them; he sends for any possible article

you can require, be it a doctor, an elephant, or a

postage stamp; and when you leave, at last, you will

find a subordinate seated with the cab-driver who will

put you in your railway compartment, buy your tickets,

have your baggage weighed, bring you the printed tags,

and tell you everything is in your bill and paid for.

At home you get such elaborate, excellent, and willing

service as this only in the best hotels of our large cities;

but in Europe you get it in the mere back country-towns just

as well.



What is the secret of the portier's devotion? It is

very simple: he gets FEES, AND NO SALARY.  His fee

is pretty closely regulated, too.  If you stay a week,

you give him five marks--a dollar and a quarter, or about

eighteen cents a day.  If you stay a month, you reduce

this average somewhat.  If you stay two or three months

or longer, you cut it down half, or even more than half.

If you stay only one day, you give the portier a mark.



The head waiter's fee is a shade less than the portier's;

the Boots, who not only blacks your boots and brushes

your clothes, but is usually the porter and handles your

baggage, gets a somewhat smaller fee than the head waiter;

the chambermaid's fee ranks below that of the Boots.

You fee only these four, and no one else.  A German

gentleman told me that when he remained a week in a hotel,

he gave the portier five marks, the head waiter four,

the Boots three, and the chambermaid two; and if he

stayed three months he divided ninety marks among them,

in about the above proportions.  Ninety marks make

$22.50.



None of these fees are ever paid until you leave the hotel,

though it be a year--except one of these four servants

should go away in the mean time; in that case he will

be sure to come and bid you good-by and give you the

opportunity to pay him what is fairly coming to him.

It is considered very bad policy to fee a servant while you

are still to remain longer in the hotel, because if you

gave him too little he might neglect you afterward,

and if you gave him too much he might neglect somebody

else to attend to you.  It is considered best to keep his

expectations "on a string" until your stay is concluded.



I do not know whether hotel servants in New York get any

wages or not, but I do know that in some of the hotels there

the feeing system in vogue is a heavy burden.  The waiter

expects a quarter at breakfast--and gets it.  You have

a different waiter at luncheon, and so he gets a quarter.

Your waiter at dinner is another stranger--consequently

he gets a quarter.  The boy who carries your satchel

to your room and lights your gas fumbles around and hangs

around significantly, and you fee him to get rid of him.

Now you may ring for ice-water; and ten minutes later

for a lemonade; and ten minutes afterward, for a cigar;

and by and by for a newspaper--and what is the result? Why,

a new boy has appeared every time and fooled and fumbled

around until you have paid him something.  Suppose you

boldly put your foot down, and say it is the hotel's

business to pay its servants? You will have to ring your

bell ten or fifteen times before you get a servant there;

and when he goes off to fill your order you will grow old

and infirm before you see him again.  You may struggle nobly

for twenty-four hours, maybe, if you are an adamantine

sort of person, but in the mean time you will have been

so wretchedly served, and so insolently, that you will

haul down your colors, and go to impoverishing yourself

with fees.



It seems to me that it would be a happy idea to import

the European feeing system into America.  I believe it

would result in getting even the bells of the Philadelphia

hotels answered, and cheerful service rendered.



The greatest American hotels keep a number of clerks

and a cashier, and pay them salaries which mount up

to a considerable total in the course of a year.

The great continental hotels keep a cashier on a trifling

salary, and a portier WHO PAYS THE HOTEL A SALARY.

By the latter system both the hotel and the public

save money and are better served than by our system.

One of our consuls told me that a portier of a great Berlin

hotel paid five thousand dollars a year for his position,

and yet cleared six thousand dollars for himself.

The position of portier in the chief hotels of Saratoga,

Long Branch, New York, and similar centers of resort,

would be one which the holder could afford to pay even more

than five thousand dollars for, perhaps.



When we borrowed the feeing fashion from Europe a dozen

years ago, the salary system ought to have been discontinued,

of course.  We might make this correction now, I should think.

And we might add the portier, too.  Since I first began

to study the portier, I have had opportunities to observe

him in the chief cities of Germany, Switzerland, and Italy;

and the more I have seen of him the more I have wished

that he might be adopted in America, and become there,

as he is in Europe, the stranger's guardian angel.



Yes, what was true eight hundred years ago, is just

as true today: "Few there be that can keep a hotel."

Perhaps it is because the landlords and their subordinates

have in too many cases taken up their trade without first

learning it.  In Europe the trade of hotel-keeper is taught.

The apprentice begins at the bottom of the ladder

and masters the several grades one after the other.

Just as in our country printing-offices the apprentice

first learns how to sweep out and bring water;

then learns to "roll"; then to sort "pi"; then to set type;

and finally rounds and completes his education with

job-work and press-work; so the landlord-apprentice serves

as call-boy; then as under-waiter; then as a parlor waiter;

then as head waiter, in which position he often has

to make out all the bills; then as clerk or cashier;

then as portier.  His trade is learned now, and by and

by he will assume the style and dignity of landlord,

and be found conducting a hotel of his own.



Now in Europe, the same as in America, when a man has

kept a hotel so thoroughly well during a number of years

as to give it a great reputation, he has his reward.

He can live prosperously on that reputation.  He can let

his hotel run down to the last degree of shabbiness and

yet have it full of people all the time.  For instance,

there is the Ho^tel de Ville, in Milan.  It swarms with mice

and fleas, and if the rest of the world were destroyed

it could furnish dirt enough to start another one with.

The food would create an insurrection in a poorhouse;

and yet if you go outside to get your meals that hotel

makes up its loss by overcharging you on all sorts

of trifles--and without making any denials or excuses

about it, either.  But the Ho^tel de Ville's old excellent

reputation still keeps its dreary rooms crowded with travelers

who would be elsewhere if they had only some wise friend

to warn them.







APPENDIX B

Heidelberg Castle



Heidelberg Castle must have been very beautiful before

the French battered and bruised and scorched it two hundred

years ago.  The stone is brown, with a pinkish tint,

and does not seem to stain easily.  The dainty and elaborate

ornamentation upon its two chief fronts is as delicately

carved as if it had been intended for the interior of a

drawing-room rather than for the outside of a house.

Many fruit and flower clusters, human heads and grim

projecting lions' heads are still as perfect in every detail

as if they were new.  But the statues which are ranked

between the windows have suffered.  These are life-size

statues of old-time emperors, electors, and similar

grandees, clad in mail and bearing ponderous swords.

Some have lost an arm, some a head, and one poor fellow

is chopped off at the middle.  There is a saying that if

a stranger will pass over the drawbridge and walk across

the court to the castle front without saying anything,

he can made a wish and it will be fulfilled.  But they

say that the truth of this thing has never had a chance

to be proved, for the reason that before any stranger can

walk from the drawbridge to the appointed place, the beauty

of the palace front will extort an exclamation of delight from

him.



A ruin must be rightly situated, to be effective.

This one could not have been better placed.  It stands

upon a commanding elevation, it is buried in green words,

there is no level ground about it, but, on the contrary,

there are wooded terraces upon terraces, and one looks

down through shining leaves into profound chasms and

abysses where twilight reigns and the sun cannot intrude.

Nature knows how to garnish a ruin to get the best effect.

One of these old towers is split down the middle, and one

half has tumbled aside.  It tumbled in such a way as to

establish itself in a picturesque attitude.  Then all it

lacked was a fitting drapery, and Nature has furnished that;

she has robed the rugged mass in flowers and verdure,

and made it a charm to the eye.  The standing half

exposes its arched and cavernous rooms to you, like open,

toothless mouths; there, too, the vines and flowers have

done their work of grace.  The rear portion of the tower

has not been neglected, either, but is clothed with a

clinging garment of polished ivy which hides the wounds

and stains of time.  Even the top is not left bare, but is

crowned with a flourishing group of trees and shrubs.

Misfortune has done for this old tower what it has done

for the human character sometimes--improved it.



A gentleman remarked, one day, that it might have been

fine to live in the castle in the day of its prime,

but that we had one advantage which its vanished

inhabitants lacked--the advantage of having a charming

ruin to visit and muse over.  But that was a hasty idea.

Those people had the advantage of US.  They had the fine

castle to live in, and they could cross the Rhine valley

and muse over the stately ruin of Trifels besides.

The Trifels people, in their day, five hundred years ago,

could go and muse over majestic ruins that have vanished,

now, to the last stone.  There have always been ruins,

no doubt; and there have always been pensive people to sigh

over them, and asses to scratch upon them their names

and the important date of their visit.  Within a hundred

years after Adam left Eden, the guide probably gave

the usual general flourish with his hand and said: "Place

where the animals were named, ladies and gentlemen;

place where the tree of the forbidden fruit stood;

exact spot where Adam and Eve first met; and here,

ladies and gentlemen, adorned and hallowed by the names

and addresses of three generations of tourists, we have

the crumbling remains of Cain's altar--fine old ruin!"

Then, no doubt, he taxed them a shekel apiece and let

them go.



An illumination of Heidelberg Castle is one of the

sights of Europe.  The Castle's picturesque shape;

its commanding situation, midway up the steep and

wooded mountainside; its vast size--these features combine

to make an illumination a most effective spectacle.

It is necessarily an expensive show, and consequently

rather infrequent.  Therefore whenever one of these exhibitions

is to take place, the news goes about in the papers and

Heidelberg is sure to be full of people on that night.

I and my agent had one of these opportunities, and improved it.



About half past seven on the appointed evening we

crossed the lower bridge, with some American students,

in a pouring rain, and started up the road which borders

the Neunheim side of the river.  This roadway was densely

packed with carriages and foot-passengers; the former

of all ages, and the latter of all ages and both sexes.

This black and solid mass was struggling painfully onward,

through the slop, the darkness, and the deluge.

We waded along for three-quarters of a mile, and finally

took up a position in an unsheltered beer-garden directly

opposite the Castle.  We could not SEE the Castle--or

anything else, for that matter--but we could dimly

discern the outlines of the mountain over the way,

through the pervading blackness, and knew whereabouts

the Castle was located.  We stood on one of the hundred

benches in the garden, under our umbrellas; the other

ninety-nine were occupied by standing men and women,

and they also had umbrellas.  All the region round about,

and up and down the river-road, was a dense wilderness of

humanity hidden under an unbroken pavement of carriage tops

and umbrellas.  Thus we stood during two drenching hours.

No rain fell on my head, but the converging whalebone

points of a dozen neighboring umbrellas poured little

cooling steams of water down my neck, and sometimes into

my ears, and thus kept me from getting hot and impatient.

I had the rheumatism, too, and had heard that this was

good for it.  Afterward, however, I was led to believe

that the water treatment is NOT good for rheumatism.

There were even little girls in that dreadful place.

A men held one in his arms, just in front of me, for as much

as an hour, with umbrella-drippings soaking into her clothing

all the time.



In the circumstances, two hours was a good while for us

to have to wait, but when the illumination did at last come,

we felt repaid.  It came unexpectedly, of course--things

always do, that have been long looked and longed for.

With a perfectly breath-taking suddenness several mast

sheaves of varicolored rockets were vomited skyward out

of the black throats of the Castle towers, accompanied by

a thundering crash of sound, and instantly every detail of

the prodigious ruin stood revealed against the mountainside

and glowing with an almost intolerable splendor of fire

and color.  For some little time the whole building was

a blinding crimson mass, the towers continued to spout

thick columns of rockets aloft, and overhead the sky

was radiant with arrowy bolts which clove their way to

the zenith, paused, curved gracefully downward, then burst

into brilliant fountain-sprays of richly colored sparks.

The red fires died slowly down, within the Castle,

and presently the shell grew nearly black outside;

the angry glare that shone out through the broken arches

and innumerable sashless windows, now, reproduced the

aspect which the Castle must have borne in the old time

when the French spoilers saw the monster bonfire which

they had made there fading and spoiling toward extinction.



While we still gazed and enjoyed, the ruin was suddenly

enveloped in rolling and rumbling volumes of vaporous

green fire; then in dazzling purple ones; then a mixture

of many colors followed, then drowned the great fabric

in its blended splendors.  Meantime the nearest bridge

had been illuminated, and from several rafts anchored

in the river, meteor showers of rockets, Roman candles,

bombs, serpents, and Catharine wheels were being discharged

in wasteful profusion into the sky--a marvelous sight indeed

to a person as little used to such spectacles as I was.

For a while the whole region about us seemed as bright as day,

and yet the rain was falling in torrents all the time.

The evening's entertainment presently closed, and we

joined the innumerable caravan of half-drowned strangers,

and waded home again.



The Castle grounds are very ample and very beautiful;

and as they joined the Hotel grounds, with no fences

to climb, but only some nobly shaded stone stairways

to descend, we spent a part of nearly every day in

idling through their smooth walks and leafy groves.

There was an attractive spot among the trees where were

a great many wooden tables and benches; and there one could

sit in the shade and pretend to sip at his foamy beaker

of beer while he inspected the crowd.  I say pretend,

because I only pretended to sip, without really sipping.

That is the polite way; but when you are ready to go,

you empty the beaker at a draught.  There was a brass band,

and it furnished excellent music every afternoon.

Sometimes so many people came that every seat was occupied,

every table filled.  And never a rough in the assemblage--all

nicely dressed fathers and mothers, young gentlemen

and ladies and children; and plenty of university

students and glittering officers; with here and there

a gray professor, or a peaceful old lady with her knitting;

and always a sprinkling of gawky foreigners.

Everybody had his glass of beer before him, or his cup

of coffee, or his bottle of wine, or his hot cutlet

and potatoes; young ladies chatted, or fanned themselves,

or wrought at their crocheting or embroidering;

the students fed sugar to their dogs, or discussed duels,

or illustrated new fencing tricks with their little canes;

and everywhere was comfort and enjoyment, and everywhere

peace and good-will to men.  The trees were jubilant

with birds, and the paths with rollicking children.

One could have a seat in that place and plenty of music,

any afternoon, for about eight cents, or a family ticket

for the season for two dollars.



For a change, when you wanted one, you could stroll

to the Castle, and burrow among its dungeons, or climb

about its ruined towers, or visit its interior shows--the

great Heidelberg Tun, for instance.  Everybody has heard

of the great Heidelberg Tun, and most people have seen it,

no doubt.  It is a wine-cask as big as a cottage, and some

traditions say it holds eighteen thousand bottles, and other

traditions say it holds eighteen hundred million barrels.

I think it likely that one of these statements is

a mistake, and the other is a lie.  However, the mere

matter of capacity is a thing of no sort of consequence,

since the cask is empty, and indeed has always been empty,

history says.  An empty cask the size of a cathedral could

excite but little emotion in me.  I do not see any wisdom

in building a monster cask to hoard up emptiness in,

when you can get a better quality, outside, any day,

free of expense.  What could this cask have been

built for? The more one studies over that, the more

uncertain and unhappy he becomes.  Some historians say

that thirty couples, some say thirty thousand couples,

can dance on the head of this cask at the same time.

Even this does not seem to me to account for the building

of it.  It does not even throw light on it.  A profound

and scholarly Englishman--a specialist--who had made

the great Heidelberg Tun his sole study for fifteen years,

told me he had at last satisfied himself that the ancients

built it to make German cream in.  He said that the average

German cow yielded from one to two and half teaspoons of milk,

when she was not worked in the plow or the hay-wagon

more than eighteen or nineteen hours a day.  This milk

was very sweet and good, and a beautiful transparent

bluish tint; but in order to get cream from it in the

most economical way, a peculiar process was necessary.

Now he believed that the habit of the ancients was to collect

several milkings in a teacup, pour it into the Great Tun,

fill up with water, and then skim off the cream from

time to time as the needs of the German Empire demanded.



This began to look reasonable.  It certainly began

to account for the German cream which I had encountered

and marveled over in so many hotels and restaurants.

But a thought struck me--



"Why did not each ancient dairyman take his own teacup

of milk and his own cask of water, and mix them,

without making a government matter of it?'



"Where could he get a cask large enough to contain

the right proportion of water?"



Very true.  It was plain that the Englishman had studied

the matter from all sides.  Still I thought I might catch

him on one point; so I asked him why the modern empire

did not make the nation's cream in the Heidelberg Tun,

instead of leaving it to rot away unused.  But he answered

as one prepared--



"A patient and diligent examination of the modern German cream

had satisfied me that they do not use the Great Tun now,

because they have got a BIGGER one hid away somewhere.

Either that is the case or they empty the spring milkings

into the mountain torrents and then skim the Rhine

all summer."



There is a museum of antiquities in the Castle, and among

its most treasured relics are ancient manuscripts connected

with German history.  There are hundreds of these,

and their dates stretch back through many centuries.

One of them is a decree signed and sealed by the hand

of a successor of Charlemagne, in the year 896.

A signature made by a hand which vanished out of this life

near a thousand years ago, is a more impressive thing than

even a ruined castle.  Luther's wedding-ring was shown me;

also a fork belonging to a time anterior to our era,

and an early bootjack.  And there was a plaster cast

of the head of a man who was assassinated about sixty

years ago.  The stab-wounds in the face were duplicated

with unpleasant fidelity.  One or two real hairs

still remained sticking in the eyebrows of the cast.

That trifle seemed to almost change the counterfeit into

a corpse.



There are many aged portraits--some valuable, some worthless;

some of great interest, some of none at all.  I bought a

couple--one a gorgeous duke of the olden time, and the other

a comely blue-eyed damsel, a princess, maybe.  I bought

them to start a portrait-gallery of my ancestors with.

I paid a dollar and a half for the duke and a half

for the princess.  One can lay in ancestors at even

cheaper rates than these, in Europe, if he will mouse

among old picture shops and look out for chances.







APPENDIX C

The College Prison



It seems that the student may break a good many of the public

laws without having to answer to the public authorities.

His case must come before the University for trial

and punishment.  If a policeman catches him in an unlawful

act and proceeds to arrest him, the offender proclaims that

he is a student, and perhaps shows his matriculation card,

whereupon the officer asks for his address, then goes

his way, and reports the matter at headquarters.  If the

offense is one over which the city has no jurisdiction,

the authorities report the case officially to the University,

and give themselves no further concern about it.

The University court send for the student, listen to

the evidence, and pronounce judgment.  The punishment

usually inflicted is imprisonment in the University prison.

As I understand it, a student's case is often tried

without his being present at all.  Then something

like this happens: A constable in the service of the

University visits the lodgings of the said student,

knocks, is invited to come in, does so, and says politely--



"If you please, I am here to conduct you to prison."



"Ah," says the student, "I was not expecting it.

What have I been doing?"



"Two weeks ago the public peace had the honor to be

disturbed by you."



"It is true; I had forgotten it.  Very well: I have been

complained of, tried, and found guilty--is that it?"



"Exactly. You are sentenced to two days' solitary confinement

in the College prison, and I am sent to fetch you."



STUDENT.  "O, I can't go today."



OFFICER.  "If you please--why?"



STUDENT.  "Because I've got an engagement."



OFFICER.  "Tomorrow, then, perhaps?"



STUDENT.  "No, I am going to the opera, tomorrow."



OFFICER.  "Could you come Friday?"



STUDENT.  (Reflectively.) "Let me see--Friday--Friday.

I don't seem to have anything on hand Friday."



OFFICER.  "Then, if you please, I will expect you on Friday."



STUDENT.  "All right, I'll come around Friday."



OFFICER.  "Thank you.  Good day, sir."



STUDENT.  "Good day."



So on Friday the student goes to the prison of his

own accord, and is admitted.



It is questionable if the world's criminal history can

show a custom more odd than this.  Nobody knows, now,

how it originated.  There have always been many noblemen

among the students, and it is presumed that all students

are gentlemen; in the old times it was usual to mar

the convenience of such folk as little as possible;

perhaps this indulgent custom owes its origin to this.



One day I was listening to some conversation upon this

subject when an American student said that for some time he

had been under sentence for a slight breach of the peace

and had promised the constable that he would presently

find an unoccupied day and betake himself to prison.

I asked the young gentleman to do me the kindness to go

to jail as soon as he conveniently could, so that I might

try to get in there and visit him, and see what college

captivity was like.  He said he would appoint the very

first day he could spare.



His confinement was to endure twenty-four hours.  He shortly

chose his day, and sent me word.  I started immediately.

When I reached the University Place, I saw two gentlemen

talking together, and, as they had portfolios under

their arms, I judged they were tutors or elderly students;

so I asked them in English to show me the college jail.

I had learned to take it for granted that anybody in Germany

who knows anything, knows English, so I had stopped

afflicting people with my German.  These gentlemen seemed

a trifle amused--and a trifle confused, too--but one

of them said he would walk around the corner with me

and show me the place.  He asked me why I wanted to get

in there, and I said to see a friend--and for curiosity.

He doubted if I would be admitted, but volunteered to put

in a word or two for me with the custodian.



He rang the bell, a door opened, and we stepped into a paved

way and then up into a small living-room, where we were

received by a hearty and good-natured German woman of fifty.

She threw up her hands with a surprised "ACH GOTT,

HERR PROFESSOR!" and exhibited a mighty deference for my

new acquaintance.  By the sparkle in her eye I judged

she was a good deal amused, too.  The "Herr Professor"

talked to her in German, and I understood enough of it

to know that he was bringing very plausible reasons to bear

for admitting me.  They were successful.  So the Herr

Professor received my earnest thanks and departed.

The old dame got her keys, took me up two or three flights

of stairs, unlocked a door, and we stood in the presence

of the criminal.  Then she went into a jolly and eager

description of all that had occurred downstairs, and what

the Herr Professor had said, and so forth and so on.

Plainly, she regarded it as quite a superior joke that I had

waylaid a Professor and employed him in so odd a service.

But I wouldn't have done it if I had known he was a Professor;

therefore my conscience was not disturbed.



Now the dame left us to ourselves.  The cell was not a roomy one;

still it was a little larger than an ordinary prison cell.

It had a window of good size, iron-grated; a small stove;

two wooden chairs; two oaken tables, very old and

most elaborately carved with names, mottoes, faces,

armorial bearings, etc.--the work of several generations

of imprisoned students; and a narrow wooden bedstead

with a villainous straw mattress, but no sheets, pillows,

blankets, or coverlets--for these the student must furnish

at his own cost if he wants them.  There was no carpet, of

course.



The ceiling was completely covered with names, dates,

and monograms, done with candle-smoke. The walls were

thickly covered with pictures and portraits (in profile),

some done with ink, some with soot, some with a pencil,

and some with red, blue, and green chalks; and whenever

an inch or two of space had remained between the pictures,

the captives had written plaintive verses, or names

and dates.  I do not think I was ever in a more elaborately

frescoed apartment.



Against the wall hung a placard containing the prison laws.

I made a note of one or two of these.  For instance:

The prisoner must pay, for the "privilege" of entering,

a sum equivalent to 20 cents of our money; for the privilege

of leaving, when his term had expired, 20 cents; for every

day spent in the prison, 12 cents; for fire and light,

12 cents a day.  The jailer furnishes coffee, mornings,

for a small sum; dinners and suppers may be ordered

from outside if the prisoner chooses--and he is allowed

to pay for them, too.



Here and there, on the walls, appeared the names

of American students, and in one place the American

arms and motto were displayed in colored chalks.



With the help of my friend I translated many of the inscriptions.



Some of them were cheerful, others the reverse.

I will give the reader a few specimens:



"In my tenth semester (my best one), I am cast here

through the complaints of others.  Let those who follow

me take warning."



"III TAGE OHNE GRUND ANGEBLICH AUS NEUGIERDE." Which is to say,

he had a curiosity to know what prison life was like;

so he made a breach in some law and got three days for it.

It is more than likely that he never had the same

curiosity again.



(TRANSLATION.) "E. Glinicke, four days for being too eager

a spectator of a row."



"F. Graf Bismarck--27-29, II, '74." Which means that

Count Bismarck, son of the great statesman, was a prisoner

two days in 1874.



(TRANSLATION.) "R. Diergandt--for Love--4 days."

Many people in this world have caught it heavier than

for the same indiscretion.



This one is terse.  I translate:



"Four weeks for MISINTERPRETED GALLANTRY." I wish

the sufferer had explained a little more fully.

A four-week term is a rather serious matter.



There were many uncomplimentary references, on the walls,

to a certain unpopular dignitary.  One sufferer had got

three days for not saluting him.  Another had "here two days

slept and three nights lain awake," on account of this

same "Dr. K." In one place was a picture of Dr. K. hanging

on a gallows.



Here and there, lonesome prisoners had eased the heavy time

by altering the records left by predecessors.  Leaving the

name standing, and the date and length of the captivity,

they had erased the description of the misdemeanor,

and written in its place, in staring capitals, "FOR THEFT!"

or "FOR MURDER!" or some other gaudy crime.  In one place,

all by itself, stood this blood-curdling word:



"Rache!" [1]



1.  "Revenge!"



There was no name signed, and no date.  It was an

inscription well calculated to pique curiosity.

One would greatly like to know the nature of the wrong

that had been done, and what sort of vengeance was wanted,

and whether the prisoner ever achieved it or not.

But there was no way of finding out these things.



Occasionally, a name was followed simply by the remark,

"II days, for disturbing the peace," and without comment

upon the justice or injustice of the sentence.



In one place was a hilarious picture of a student of the

green cap corps with a bottle of champagne in each hand;

and below was the legend: "These make an evil fate endurable."



There were two prison cells, and neither had space left on

walls or ceiling for another name or portrait or picture.

The inside surfaces of the two doors were completely

covered with CARTES DE VISITE of former prisoners,

ingeniously let into the wood and protected from dirt

and injury by glass.



I very much wanted one of the sorry old tables which

the prisoners had spent so many years in ornamenting

with their pocket-knives, but red tape was in the way.

The custodian could not sell one without an order from

a superior; and that superior would have to get it from

HIS superior; and this one would have to get it from

a higher one--and so on up and up until the faculty

should sit on the matter and deliver final judgment.

The system was right, and nobody could find fault with it;

but it did not seem justifiable to bother so many people,

so I proceeded no further.  It might have cost me more than

I could afford, anyway; for one of those prison tables,

which was at the time in a private museum in Heidelberg,

was afterward sold at auction for two hundred and fifty dollars.

It was not worth more than a dollar, or possibly a dollar

and half, before the captive students began their work

on it.  Persons who saw it at the auction said it was

so curiously and wonderfully carved that it was worth

the money that was paid for it.



Among them many who have tasted the college prison's

dreary hospitality was a lively young fellow from one

of the Southern states of America, whose first year's

experience of German university life was rather peculiar.

The day he arrived in Heidelberg he enrolled his name

on the college books, and was so elated with the fact

that his dearest hope had found fruition and he was

actually a student of the old and renowned university,

that he set to work that very night to celebrate the event

by a grand lark in company with some other students.

In the course of his lark he managed to make a wide

breach in one of the university's most stringent laws.

Sequel: before noon, next day, he was in the college

prison--booked for three months.  The twelve long weeks

dragged slowly by, and the day of deliverance came at last.

A great crowd of sympathizing fellow-students received

him with a rousing demonstration as he came forth,

and of course there was another grand lark--in the course

of which he managed to make a wide breach of the CITY'S

most stringent laws.  Sequel: before noon, next day,

he was safe in the city lockup--booked for three months.

This second tedious captivity drew to an end in the course

of time, and again a great crowd of sympathizing fellow

students gave him a rousing reception as he came forth;

but his delight in his freedom was so boundless that he

could not proceed soberly and calmly, but must go hopping

and skipping and jumping down the sleety street from sheer

excess of joy.  Sequel: he slipped and broke his leg,

and actually lay in the hospital during the next three

months!



When he at last became a free man again, he said he believed

he would hunt up a brisker seat of learning; the Heidelberg

lectures might be good, but the opportunities of attending

them were too rare, the educational process too slow;

he said he had come to Europe with the idea that the

acquirement of an education was only a matter of time,

but if he had averaged the Heidelberg system correctly,

it was rather a matter of eternity.







APPENDIX D

The Awful German Language



A little learning makes the whole world kin.

        --Proverbs xxxii, 7.



I went often to look at the collection of curiosities

in Heidelberg Castle, and one day I surprised the keeper

of it with my German.  I spoke entirely in that language.

He was greatly interested; and after I had talked a while

he said my German was very rare, possibly a "unique";

and wanted to add it to his museum.



If he had known what it had cost me to acquire my art,

he would also have known that it would break any

collector to buy it.  Harris and I had been hard at

work on our German during several weeks at that time,

and although we had made good progress, it had been

accomplished under great difficulty and annoyance,

for three of our teachers had died in the mean time.

A person who has not studied German can form no idea

of what a perplexing language it is.



Surely there is not another language that is so slipshod

and systemless, and so slippery and elusive to the grasp.

One is washed about in it, hither and thither, in the most

helpless way; and when at last he thinks he has captured

a rule which offers firm ground to take a rest on amid

the general rage and turmoil of the ten parts of speech,

he turns over the page and reads, "Let the pupil make

careful note of the following EXCEPTIONS." He runs his

eye down and finds that there are more exceptions to the

rule than instances of it.  So overboard he goes again,

to hunt for another Ararat and find another quicksand.

Such has been, and continues to be, my experience.

Every time I think I have got one of these four confusing

"cases" where I am master of it, a seemingly insignificant

preposition intrudes itself into my sentence, clothed with

an awful and unsuspected power, and crumbles the ground

from under me.  For instance, my book inquires after

a certain bird--(it is always inquiring after things

which are of no sort of no consequence to anybody): "Where

is the bird?" Now the answer to this question--according

to the book--is that the bird is waiting in the blacksmith

shop on account of the rain.  Of course no bird would

do that, but then you must stick to the book.  Very well,

I begin to cipher out the German for that answer.  I begin

at the wrong end, necessarily, for that is the German idea.

I say to myself, "REGEN (rain) is masculine--or maybe it

is feminine--or possibly neuter--it is too much trouble

to look now.  Therefore, it is either DER (the) Regen,

or DIE (the) Regen, or DAS (the) Regen, according to which

gender it may turn out to be when I look.  In the interest

of science, I will cipher it out on the hypothesis that it

is masculine.  Very well--then THE rain is DER Regen,

if it is simply in the quiescent state of being MENTIONED,

without enlargement or discussion--Nominative case;

but if this rain is lying around, in a kind of a general

way on the ground, it is then definitely located,

it is DOING SOMETHING--that is, RESTING (which is one

of the German grammar's ideas of doing something), and

this throws the rain into the Dative case, and makes it

DEM Regen.  However, this rain is not resting, but is

doing something ACTIVELY,--it is falling--to interfere

with the bird, likely--and this indicates MOVEMENT,

which has the effect of sliding it into the Accusative case

and changing DEM Regen into DEN Regen." Having completed

the grammatical horoscope of this matter, I answer up

confidently and state in German that the bird is staying

in the blacksmith shop "wegen (on account of) DEN Regen."

Then the teacher lets me softly down with the remark

that whenever the word "wegen" drops into a sentence,

it ALWAYS throws that subject into the GENITIVE case,

regardless of consequences--and therefore this bird stayed in

the blacksmith shop "wegen DES Regens."



N.B.--I was informed, later, by a higher authority,

that there was an "exception" which permits one to say "wegen

DEN Regen" in certain peculiar and complex circumstances,

but that this exception is not extended to anything

BUT rain.



There are ten parts of speech, and they are all troublesome.

An average sentence, in a German newspaper, is a sublime

and impressive curiosity; it occupies a quarter of a column;

it contains all the ten parts of speech--not in regular order,

but mixed; it is built mainly of compound words constructed

by the writer on the spot, and not to be found in any

dictionary--six or seven words compacted into one,

without joint or seam--that is, without hyphens;

it treats of fourteen or fifteen different subjects,

each enclosed in a parenthesis of its own, with here and

there extra parentheses, making pens with pens: finally,

all the parentheses and reparentheses are massed together

between a couple of king-parentheses, one of which is placed

in the first line of the majestic sentence and the other

in the middle of the last line of it--AFTER WHICH COMES

THE VERB, and you find out for the first time what the man

has been talking about; and after the verb--merely by way

of ornament, as far as I can make out--the writer shovels

in "HABEN SIND GEWESEN GEHABT HAVEN GEWORDEN SEIN,"

or words to that effect, and the monument is finished.

I suppose that this closing hurrah is in the nature of the

flourish to a man's signature--not necessary, but pretty.

German books are easy enough to read when you hold them

before the looking-glass or stand on your head--so as

to reverse the construction--but I think that to learn

to read and understand a German newspaper is a thing

which must always remain an impossibility to a foreigner.



Yet even the German books are not entirely free from attacks

of the Parenthesis distemper--though they are usually so mild

as to cover only a few lines, and therefore when you at

last get down to the verb it carries some meaning to your

mind because you are able to remember a good deal of what

has gone before.  Now here is a sentence from a popular

and excellent German novel--which a slight parenthesis

in it.  I will make a perfectly literal translation,

and throw in the parenthesis-marks and some hyphens

for the assistance of the reader--though in the original

there are no parenthesis-marks or hyphens, and the reader

is left to flounder through to the remote verb the best way he

can:



"But when he, upon the street, the (in-satin-and-silk-covered-

now-very-unconstrained-after-the-newest-fashioned-dressed)

government counselor's wife MET," etc., etc. [1]



1.  Wenn er aber auf der Strasse der in Sammt und Seide

    gehuellten jetz sehr ungenirt nach der neusten mode

    gekleideten Regierungsrathin begegnet.



That is from THE OLD MAMSELLE'S SECRET, by Mrs. Marlitt.

And that sentence is constructed upon the most approved

German model.  You observe how far that verb is from

the reader's base of operations; well, in a German

newspaper they put their verb away over on the next page;

and I have heard that sometimes after stringing along the

exciting preliminaries and parentheses for a column or two,

they get in a hurry and have to go to press without getting

to the verb at all.  Of course, then, the reader is left

in a very exhausted and ignorant state.



We have the Parenthesis disease in our literature, too; and one

may see cases of it every day in our books and newspapers:

but with us it is the mark and sign of an unpracticed

writer or a cloudy intellect, whereas with the Germans

it is doubtless the mark and sign of a practiced pen

and of the presence of that sort of luminous intellectual

fog which stands for clearness among these people.

For surely it is NOT clearness--it necessarily can't

be clearness.  Even a jury would have penetration enough

to discover that.  A writer's ideas must be a good

deal confused, a good deal out of line and sequence,

when he starts out to say that a man met a counselor's

wife in the street, and then right in the midst of this

so simple undertaking halts these approaching people

and makes them stand still until he jots down an inventory

of the woman's dress.  That is manifestly absurd.

It reminds a person of those dentists who secure your instant

and breathless interest in a tooth by taking a grip on it

with the forceps, and then stand there and drawl through

a tedious anecdote before they give the dreaded jerk.

Parentheses in literature and dentistry are in bad taste.



The Germans have another kind of parenthesis, which they

make by splitting a verb in two and putting half of it

at the beginning of an exciting chapter and the OTHER

HALF at the end of it.  Can any one conceive of anything

more confusing than that? These things are called

"separable verbs." The German grammar is blistered

all over with separable verbs; and the wider the two

portions of one of them are spread apart, the better

the author of the crime is pleased with his performance.

A favorite one is REISTE AB--which means departed.

Here is an example which I culled from a novel and reduced

to English:



"The trunks being now ready, he DE- after kissing his

mother and sisters, and once more pressing to his bosom

his adored Gretchen, who, dressed in simple white muslin,

with a single tuberose in the ample folds of her rich

brown hair, had tottered feebly down the stairs, still pale

from the terror and excitement of the past evening,

but longing to lay her poor aching head yet once again

upon the breast of him whom she loved more dearly than

life itself, PARTED."



However, it is not well to dwell too much on the

separable verbs.  One is sure to lose his temper early;

and if he sticks to the subject, and will not be warned,

it will at last either soften his brain or petrify it.

Personal pronouns and adjectives are a fruitful nuisance

in this language, and should have been left out.

For instance, the same sound, SIE, means YOU, and it means SHE,

and it means HER, and it means IT, and it means THEY,

and it means THEM.  Think of the ragged poverty of a

language which has to make one word do the work of six--and

a poor little weak thing of only three letters at that.

But mainly, think of the exasperation of never knowing

which of these meanings the speaker is trying to convey.

This explains why, whenever a person says SIE to me,

I generally try to kill him, if a stranger.



Now observe the Adjective.  Here was a case where simplicity

would have been an advantage; therefore, for no other reason,

the inventor of this language complicated it all he could.

When we wish to speak of our "good friend or friends,"

in our enlightened tongue, we stick to the one form and have

no trouble or hard feeling about it; but with the German

tongue it is different.  When a German gets his hands

on an adjective, he declines it, and keeps on declining

it until the common sense is all declined out of it.

It is as bad as Latin.  He says, for instance:



SINGULAR



Nominative--Mein gutER Freund, my good friend.

Genitives--MeinES GutEN FreundES, of my good friend.

Dative--MeinEM gutEN Freund, to my good friend.

Accusative--MeinEN gutEN Freund, my good friend.



PLURAL



N.--MeinE gutEN FreundE, my good friends.  G.--MeinER gutEN

FreundE, of my good friends.  D.--MeinEN gutEN FreundEN,

to my good friends.  A.--MeinE gutEN FreundE, my good friends.



Now let the candidate for the asylum try to memorize

those variations, and see how soon he will be elected.

One might better go without friends in Germany than take

all this trouble about them.  I have shown what a bother

it is to decline a good (male) friend; well this is

only a third of the work, for there is a variety of new

distortions of the adjective to be learned when the object

is feminine, and still another when the object is neuter.

Now there are more adjectives in this language than there

are black cats in Switzerland, and they must all be as

elaborately declined as the examples above suggested.

Difficult?--troublesome?--these words cannot describe it.

I heard a Californian student in Heidelberg say, in one of

his calmest moods, that he would rather decline two drinks

than one German adjective.



The inventor of the language seems to have taken pleasure

in complicating it in every way he could think of.

For instance, if one is casually referring to a house,

HAUS, or a horse, PFERD, or a dog, HUND, he spells these

words as I have indicated; but if he is referring to them

in the Dative case, he sticks on a foolish and unnecessary

E and spells them HAUSE, PFERDE, HUNDE.  So, as an added

E often signifies the plural, as the S does with us,

the new student is likely to go on for a month making

twins out of a Dative dog before he discovers his mistake;

and on the other hand, many a new student who could ill

afford loss, has bought and paid for two dogs and only

got one of them, because he ignorantly bought that dog

in the Dative singular when he really supposed he was

talking plural--which left the law on the seller's side,

of course, by the strict rules of grammar, and therefore

a suit for recovery could not lie.



In German, all the Nouns begin with a capital letter.

Now that is a good idea; and a good idea, in this language,

is necessarily conspicuous from its lonesomeness.  I consider

this capitalizing of nouns a good idea, because by reason

of it you are almost always able to tell a noun the minute

you see it.  You fall into error occasionally, because you

mistake the name of a person for the name of a thing,

and waste a good deal of time trying to dig a meaning

out of it.  German names almost always do mean something,

and this helps to deceive the student.  I translated

a passage one day, which said that "the infuriated tigress

broke loose and utterly ate up the unfortunate fir forest"

(Tannenwald). When I was girding up my loins to doubt this,

I found out that Tannenwald in this instance was a

man's name.



Every noun has a gender, and there is no sense or system

in the distribution; so the gender of each must be

learned separately and by heart.  There is no other way.

To do this one has to have a memory like a memorandum-book.

In German, a young lady has no sex, while a turnip has.

Think what overwrought reverence that shows for the turnip,

and what callous disrespect for the girl.  See how it

looks in print--I translate this from a conversation

in one of the best of the German Sunday-school books:



"Gretchen. Wilhelm, where is the turnip?



"Wilhelm. She has gone to the kitchen.



"Gretchen. Where is the accomplished and beautiful English

maiden?



"Wilhelm.  It has gone to the opera."



To continue with the German genders: a tree is male, its buds

are female, its leaves are neuter; horses are sexless,

dogs are male, cats are female--tomcats included, of course;

a person's mouth, neck, bosom, elbows, fingers, nails, feet,

and body are of the male sex, and his head is male

or neuter according to the word selected to signify it,

and NOT according to the sex of the individual who wears

it--for in Germany all the women either male heads or

sexless ones; a person's nose, lips, shoulders, breast,

hands, and toes are of the female sex; and his hair,

ears, eyes, chin, legs, knees, heart, and conscience

haven't any sex at all.  The inventor of the language

probably got what he knew about a conscience from hearsay.



Now, by the above dissection, the reader will see that in

Germany a man may THINK he is a man, but when he comes to look

into the matter closely, he is bound to have his doubts;

he finds that in sober truth he is a most ridiculous mixture;

and if he ends by trying to comfort himself with the

thought that he can at least depend on a third of this

mess as being manly and masculine, the humiliating second

thought will quickly remind him that in this respect

he is no better off than any woman or cow in the land.



In the German it is true that by some oversight of the inventor

of the language, a Woman is a female; but a Wife (Weib)

is not--which is unfortunate.  A Wife, here, has no sex;

she is neuter; so, according to the grammar, a fish

is HE, his scales are SHE, but a fishwife is neither.

To describe a wife as sexless may be called under-description;

that is bad enough, but over-description is surely worse.

A German speaks of an Englishman as the ENGLAENDER; to change

the sex, he adds INN, and that stands for Englishwoman

--ENGLAENDERINN. That seems descriptive enough, but still

it is not exact enough for a German; so he precedes the

word with that article which indicates that the creature

to follow is feminine, and writes it down thus: "die

Englaenderinn,"--which means "the she-Englishwoman."

I consider that that person is over-described.



Well, after the student has learned the sex of a great

number of nouns, he is still in a difficulty, because he

finds it impossible to persuade his tongue to refer

to things as "he" and "she," and "him" and "her," which

it has been always accustomed to refer to it as "it."

When he even frames a German sentence in his mind,

with the hims and hers in the right places, and then works

up his courage to the utterance-point, it is no use

--the moment he begins to speak his tongue files the track

and all those labored males and females come out as "its."

And even when he is reading German to himself, he always

calls those things "it," where as he ought to read in this way:



TALE OF THE FISHWIFE AND ITS SAD FATE [2]



2.  I capitalize the nouns, in the German (and

    ancient English) fashion.



It is a bleak Day.  Hear the Rain, how he pours, and the Hail,

how he rattles; and see the Snow, how he drifts along,

and of the Mud, how deep he is! Ah the poor Fishwife,

it is stuck fast in the Mire; it has dropped its Basket

of Fishes; and its Hands have been cut by the Scales

as it seized some of the falling Creatures; and one Scale

has even got into its Eye.  and it cannot get her out.

It opens its Mouth to cry for Help; but if any Sound comes

out of him, alas he is drowned by the raging of the Storm.

And now a Tomcat has got one of the Fishes and she

will surely escape with him.  No, she bites off a Fin,

she holds her in her Mouth--will she swallow her? No,

the Fishwife's brave Mother-dog deserts his Puppies and

rescues the Fin--which he eats, himself, as his Reward.

O, horror, the Lightning has struck the Fish-basket;

he sets him on Fire; see the Flame, how she licks the

doomed Utensil with her red and angry Tongue; now she

attacks the helpless Fishwife's Foot--she burns him up,

all but the big Toe, and even SHE is partly consumed;

and still she spreads, still she waves her fiery Tongues;

she attacks the Fishwife's Leg and destroys IT; she attacks

its Hand and destroys HER also; she attacks the Fishwife's Leg

and destroys HER also; she attacks its Body and consumes HIM;

she wreathes herself about its Heart and IT is consumed;

next about its Breast, and in a Moment SHE is a Cinder;

now she reaches its Neck--He goes; now its Chin

--IT goes; now its Nose--SHE goes.  In another Moment,

except Help come, the Fishwife will be no more.

Time presses--is there none to succor and save? Yes! Joy,

joy, with flying Feet the she-Englishwoman comes! But alas,

the generous she-Female is too late: where now is

the fated Fishwife? It has ceased from its Sufferings,

it has gone to a better Land; all that is left of it

for its loved Ones to lament over, is this poor smoldering

Ash-heap. Ah, woeful, woeful Ash-heap! Let us take him

up tenderly, reverently, upon the lowly Shovel, and bear

him to his long Rest, with the Prayer that when he rises

again it will be a Realm where he will have one good square

responsible Sex, and have it all to himself, instead of

having a mangy lot of assorted Sexes scattered all over him

in Spots.



----------



There, now, the reader can see for himself that this pronoun

business is a very awkward thing for the unaccustomed tongue.

I suppose that in all languages the similarities of look

and sound between words which have no similarity in meaning

are a fruitful source of perplexity to the foreigner.

It is so in our tongue, and it is notably the case in

the German.  Now there is that troublesome word VERMAEHLT:

to me it has so close a resemblance--either real or

fancied--to three or four other words, that I never know

whether it means despised, painted, suspected, or married;

until I look in the dictionary, and then I find it means

the latter.  There are lots of such words and they are

a great torment.  To increase the difficulty there are

words which SEEM to resemble each other, and yet do not;

but they make just as much trouble as if they did.

For instance, there is the word VERMIETHEN (to let,

to lease, to hire); and the word VERHEIRATHEN (another way

of saying to marry). I heard of an Englishman who knocked

at a man's door in Heidelberg and proposed, in the best

German he could command, to "verheirathen" that house.

Then there are some words which mean one thing when you

emphasize the first syllable, but mean something very

different if you throw the emphasis on the last syllable.

For instance, there is a word which means a runaway,

or the act of glancing through a book, according to the

placing of the emphasis; and another word which signifies

to ASSOCIATE with a man, or to AVOID him, according to

where you put the emphasis--and you can generally depend

on putting it in the wrong place and getting into trouble.



There are some exceedingly useful words in this language.

SCHLAG, for example; and ZUG.  There are three-quarters

of a column of SCHLAGS in the dictionary, and a column

and a half of ZUGS.  The word SCHLAG means Blow, Stroke,

Dash, Hit, Shock, Clap, Slap, Time, Bar, Coin, Stamp, Kind,

Sort, Manner, Way, Apoplexy, Wood-cutting, Enclosure,

Field, Forest-clearing. This is its simple and EXACT

meaning--that is to say, its restricted, its fettered meaning;

but there are ways by which you can set it free,

so that it can soar away, as on the wings of the morning,

and never be at rest.  You can hang any word you please

to its tail, and make it mean anything you want to.

You can begin with SCHLAG-ADER, which means artery,

and you can hang on the whole dictionary, word by word,

clear through the alphabet to SCHLAG-WASSER, which means

bilge-water--and including SCHLAG-MUTTER, which means

mother-in-law.



Just the same with ZUG.  Strictly speaking, ZUG means Pull,

Tug, Draught, Procession, March, Progress, Flight, Direction,

Expedition, Train, Caravan, Passage, Stroke, Touch, Line,

Flourish, Trait of Character, Feature, Lineament, Chess-move,

Organ-stop, Team, Whiff, Bias, Drawer, Propensity, Inhalation,

Disposition: but that thing which it does NOT mean--when

all its legitimate pennants have been hung on, has not been

discovered yet.



One cannot overestimate the usefulness of SCHLAG and ZUG.

Armed just with these two, and the word ALSO, what cannot

the foreigner on German soil accomplish? The German word

ALSO is the equivalent of the English phrase "You know,"

and does not mean anything at all--in TALK, though it

sometimes does in print.  Every time a German opens his

mouth an ALSO falls out; and every time he shuts it he bites

one in two that was trying to GET out.



Now, the foreigner, equipped with these three noble words,

is master of the situation.  Let him talk right along,

fearlessly; let him pour his indifferent German forth,

and when he lacks for a word, let him heave a SCHLAG into

the vacuum; all the chances are that it fits it like a plug,

but if it doesn't let him promptly heave a ZUG after it;

the two together can hardly fail to bung the hole; but if,

by a miracle, they SHOULD fail, let him simply say ALSO!

and this will give him a moment's chance to think of the

needful word.  In Germany, when you load your conversational

gun it is always best to throw in a SCHLAG or two and a ZUG

or two, because it doesn't make any difference how much

the rest of the charge may scatter, you are bound to bag

something with THEM.  Then you blandly say ALSO, and load

up again.  Nothing gives such an air of grace and elegance

and unconstraint to a German or an English conversation

as to scatter it full of "Also's" or "You knows."



In my note-book I find this entry:



July 1.--In the hospital yesterday, a word of thirteen

syllables was successfully removed from a patient--a

North German from near Hamburg; but as most unfortunately

the surgeons had opened him in the wrong place, under the

impression that he contained a panorama, he died.

The sad event has cast a gloom over the whole community.



That paragraph furnishes a text for a few remarks about

one of the most curious and notable features of my

subject--the length of German words.  Some German words

are so long that they have a perspective.  Observe these

examples:



Freundschaftsbezeigungen.



Dilettantenaufdringlichkeiten.



Stadtverordnetenversammlungen.



These things are not words, they are alphabetical processions.

And they are not rare; one can open a German newspaper

at any time and see them marching majestically across

the page--and if he has any imagination he can see

the banners and hear the music, too.  They impart

a martial thrill to the meekest subject.  I take a

great interest in these curiosities.  Whenever I come

across a good one, I stuff it and put it in my museum.

In this way I have made quite a valuable collection.

When I get duplicates, I exchange with other collectors,

and thus increase the variety of my stock.  Here rare

some specimens which I lately bought at an auction sale

of the effects of a bankrupt bric-a-brac hunter:



Generalstaatsverordnetenversammlungen.



Alterthumswissenschaften.



Kinderbewahrungsanstalten.



Unabhaengigkeitserklaerungen.



Wiedererstellungbestrebungen.



Waffenstillstandsunterhandlungen.



Of course when one of these grand mountain ranges goes

stretching across the printed page, it adorns and ennobles

that literary landscape--but at the same time it is a great

distress to the new student, for it blocks up his way;

he cannot crawl under it, or climb over it, or tunnel

through it.  So he resorts to the dictionary for help,

but there is no help there.  The dictionary must draw

the line somewhere--so it leaves this sort of words out.

And it is right, because these long things are hardly

legitimate words, but are rather combinations of words,

and the inventor of them ought to have been killed.

They are compound words with the hyphens left out.

The various words used in building them are in the dictionary,

but in a very scattered condition; so you can hunt

the materials out, one by one, and get at the meaning

at last, but it is a tedious and harassing business.

I have tried this process upon some of the above examples.

"Freundshaftsbezeigungen" seems to be "Friendship demonstrations,"

which is only a foolish and clumsy way of saying "demonstrations

of friendship." "Unabhaengigkeitserklaerungen" seems

to be "Independencedeclarations," which is no improvement

upon "Declarations of Independence," so far as I can see.

"Generalstaatsverordnetenversammlungen" seems to be

"General-statesrepresentativesmeetings," as nearly as I

can get at it--a mere rhythmical, gushy euphemism for

"meetings of the legislature," I judge.  We used to have

a good deal of this sort of crime in our literature,

but it has gone out now.  We used to speak of a things as a

"never-to-be-forgotten" circumstance, instead of cramping

it into the simple and sufficient word "memorable" and then

going calmly about our business as if nothing had happened.

In those days we were not content to embalm the thing

and bury it decently, we wanted to build a monument over it.



But in our newspapers the compounding-disease lingers

a little to the present day, but with the hyphens left out,

in the German fashion.  This is the shape it takes:

instead of saying "Mr. Simmons, clerk of the county and

district courts, was in town yesterday," the new form put

it thus: "Clerk of the County and District Courts Simmons

was in town yesterday." This saves neither time nor ink,

and has an awkward sound besides.  One often sees a remark

like this in our papers: "MRS. Assistant District Attorney

Johnson returned to her city residence yesterday for the season."

That is a case of really unjustifiable compounding;

because it not only saves no time or trouble, but confers

a title on Mrs. Johnson which she has no right to.

But these little instances are trifles indeed, contrasted

with the ponderous and dismal German system of piling

jumbled compounds together.  I wish to submit the following

local item, from a Mannheim journal, by way of illustration:



"In the daybeforeyesterdayshortlyaftereleveno'clock Night,

the inthistownstandingtavern called 'The Wagoner' was downburnt.

When the fire to the onthedownburninghouseresting Stork's

Nest reached, flew the parent Storks away.  But when

the bytheraging, firesurrounded Nest ITSELF caught Fire,

straightway plunged the quickreturning Mother-Stork into

the Flames and died, her Wings over her young ones outspread."



Even the cumbersome German construction is not able to

take the pathos out of that picture--indeed, it somehow

seems to strengthen it.  This item is dated away back

yonder months ago.  I could have used it sooner, but I

was waiting to hear from the Father-stork. I am still waiting.



"ALSO!" If I had not shown that the German is a

difficult language, I have at least intended to do so.

I have heard of an American student who was asked how he

was getting along with his German, and who answered

promptly: "I am not getting along at all.  I have worked

at it hard for three level months, and all I have got

to show for it is one solitary German phrase--'ZWEI GLAS'"

(two glasses of beer). He paused for a moment, reflectively;

then added with feeling: "But I've got that SOLID!"



And if I have not also shown that German is a harassing

and infuriating study, my execution has been at fault,

and not my intent.  I heard lately of a worn and sorely

tried American student who used to fly to a certain German

word for relief when he could bear up under his aggravations

no longer--the only word whose sound was sweet and

precious to his ear and healing to his lacerated spirit.

This was the word DAMIT.  It was only the SOUND that

helped him, not the meaning; [3] and so, at last, when he

learned that the emphasis was not on the first syllable,

his only stay and support was gone, and he faded away

and died.



3.  It merely means, in its general sense, "herewith."



I think that a description of any loud, stirring,

tumultuous episode must be tamer in German than in English.

Our descriptive words of this character have such

a deep, strong, resonant sound, while their German

equivalents do seem so thin and mild and energyless.

Boom, burst, crash, roar, storm, bellow, blow, thunder,

explosion; howl, cry, shout, yell, groan; battle, hell.

These are magnificent words; the have a force and magnitude

of sound befitting the things which they describe.

But their German equivalents would be ever so nice to sing

the children to sleep with, or else my awe-inspiring ears

were made for display and not for superior usefulness

in analyzing sounds.  Would any man want to die in a

battle which was called by so tame a term as a SCHLACHT?

Or would not a consumptive feel too much bundled up,

who was about to go out, in a shirt-collar and a seal-ring,

into a storm which the bird-song word GEWITTER was employed

to describe? And observe the strongest of the several

German equivalents for explosion--AUSBRUCH.  Our word

Toothbrush is more powerful than that.  It seems to me

that the Germans could do worse than import it into their

language to describe particularly tremendous explosions with.

The German word for hell--Hoelle--sounds more like HELLY

than anything else; therefore, how necessary chipper,

frivolous, and unimpressive it is.  If a man were told

in German to go there, could he really rise to thee

dignity of feeling insulted?



Having pointed out, in detail, the several vices of

this language, I now come to the brief and pleasant task

of pointing out its virtues.  The capitalizing of the nouns

I have already mentioned.  But far before this virtue stands

another--that of spelling a word according to the sound of it.

After one short lesson in the alphabet, the student can tell

how any German word is pronounced without having to ask;

whereas in our language if a student should inquire of us,

"What does B, O, W, spell?" we should be obliged to reply,

"Nobody can tell what it spells when you set if off by itself;

you can only tell by referring to the context and finding

out what it signifies--whether it is a thing to shoot

arrows with, or a nod of one's head, or the forward end of a

boat."



There are some German words which are singularly

and powerfully effective.  For instance, those which

describe lowly, peaceful, and affectionate home life;

those which deal with love, in any and all forms,

from mere kindly feeling and honest good will toward

the passing stranger, clear up to courtship; those which

deal with outdoor Nature, in its softest and loveliest

aspects--with meadows and forests, and birds and flowers,

the fragrance and sunshine of summer, and the moonlight

of peaceful winter nights; in a word, those which deal with

any and all forms of rest, repose, and peace; those also

which deal with the creatures and marvels of fairyland;

and lastly and chiefly, in those words which express pathos,

is the language surpassingly rich and affective.  There are

German songs which can make a stranger to the language cry.

That shows that the SOUND of the words is correct--it

interprets the meanings with truth and with exactness;

and so the ear is informed, and through the ear, the heart.



The Germans do not seem to be afraid to repeat a word

when it is the right one.  They repeat it several times,

if they choose.  That is wise.  But in English, when we

have used a word a couple of times in a paragraph,

we imagine we are growing tautological, and so we are weak

enough to exchange it for some other word which only

approximates exactness, to escape what we wrongly fancy

is a greater blemish.  Repetition may be bad, but surely

inexactness is worse.



-----------



There are people in the world who will take a great

deal of trouble to point out the faults in a religion

or a language, and then go blandly about their business

without suggesting any remedy.  I am not that kind

of person.  I have shown that the German language

needs reforming.  Very well, I am ready to reform it.

At least I am ready to make the proper suggestions.

Such a course as this might be immodest in another; but I

have devoted upward of nine full weeks, first and last,

to a careful and critical study of this tongue, and thus

have acquired a confidence in my ability to reform it

which no mere superficial culture could have conferred

upon me.



In the first place, I would leave out the Dative case.

It confuses the plurals; and, besides, nobody ever knows

when he is in the Dative case, except he discover it

by accident--and then he does not know when or where it

was that he got into it, or how long he has been in it,

or how he is going to get out of it again.  The Dative case

is but an ornamental folly--it is better to discard it.



In the next place, I would move the Verb further up

to the front.  You may load up with ever so good a Verb,

but I notice that you never really bring down a subject

with it at the present German range--you only cripple it.

So I insist that this important part of speech should be

brought forward to a position where it may be easily seen

with the naked eye.



Thirdly, I would import some strong words from the English

tongue--to swear with, and also to use in describing

all sorts of vigorous things in a vigorous ways. [4]



4.  "Verdammt," and its variations and enlargements,

    are words which have plenty of meaning, but the SOUNDS

    are so mild and ineffectual that German ladies can use

    them without sin.  German ladies who could not be induced

    to commit a sin by any persuasion or compulsion, promptly rip

    out one of these harmless little words when they tear their

    dresses or don't like the soup.  It sounds about as wicked

    as our "My gracious." German ladies are constantly saying,

    "Ach! Gott!" "Mein Gott!" "Gott in Himmel!" "Herr Gott"

    "Der Herr Jesus!" etc.  They think our ladies have the

    same custom, perhaps; for I once heard a gentle and lovely

    old German lady say to a sweet young American girl:

    "The two languages are so alike--how pleasant that is;

    we say 'Ach! Gott!' you say 'Goddamn.'"



Fourthly, I would reorganizes the sexes, and distribute

them accordingly to the will of the creator.  This as

a tribute of respect, if nothing else.



Fifthly, I would do away with those great long

compounded words; or require the speaker to deliver

them in sections, with intermissions for refreshments.

To wholly do away with them would be best, for ideas are

more easily received and digested when they come one at

a time than when they come in bulk.  Intellectual food

is like any other; it is pleasanter and more beneficial

to take it with a spoon than with a shovel.



Sixthly, I would require a speaker to stop when he is done,

and not hang a string of those useless "haven sind gewesen

gehabt haben geworden seins" to the end of his oration.

This sort of gewgaws undignify a speech, instead of adding

a grace.  They are, therefore, an offense, and should

be discarded.



Seventhly, I would discard the Parenthesis.  Also the reparenthesis,

the re-reparenthesis, and the re-re-re-re-re-reparentheses,

and likewise the final wide-reaching all-enclosing

king-parenthesis. I would require every individual,

be he high or low, to unfold a plain straightforward tale,

or else coil it and sit on it and hold his peace.

Infractions of this law should be punishable with death.



And eighthly, and last, I would retain ZUG and SCHLAG,

with their pendants, and discard the rest of the vocabulary.

This would simplify the language.



I have now named what I regard as the most necessary

and important changes.  These are perhaps all I could

be expected to name for nothing; but there are other

suggestions which I can and will make in case my proposed

application shall result in my being formally employed

by the government in the work of reforming the language.



My philological studies have satisfied me that a gifted person

ought to learn English (barring spelling and pronouncing)

in thirty hours, French in thirty days, and German

in thirty years.  It seems manifest, then, that the

latter tongue ought to be trimmed down and repaired.

If it is to remain as it is, it ought to be gently

and reverently set aside among the dead languages,

for only the dead have time to learn it.



A FOURTH OF JULY ORATION IN THE GERMAN TONGUE, DELIVERED AT

A BANQUET OF THE ANGLO-AMERICAN CLUB OF STUDENTS BY THE

AUTHOR OF THIS BOOK



Gentlemen: Since I arrived, a month ago, in this

old wonderland, this vast garden of Germany, my English

tongue has so often proved a useless piece of baggage

to me, and so troublesome to carry around, in a country

where they haven't the checking system for luggage, that I

finally set to work, and learned the German language.

Also! Es freut mich dass dies so ist, denn es muss,

in ein hauptsaechlich degree, hoeflich sein, dass man

auf ein occasion like this, sein Rede in die Sprache des

Landes worin he boards, aussprechen soll.  Dafuer habe ich,

aus reinische Verlegenheit--no, Vergangenheit--no, I

mean Hoflichkeit--aus reinishe Hoflichkeit habe ich

resolved to tackle this business in the German language,

um Gottes willen! Also! Sie muessen so freundlich sein,

und verzeih mich die interlarding von ein oder zwei

Englischer Worte, hie und da, denn ich finde dass die

deutsche is not a very copious language, and so when

you've really got anything to say, you've got to draw

on a language that can stand the strain.



Wenn haber man kann nicht meinem Rede Verstehen, so werde

ich ihm spaeter dasselbe uebersetz, wenn er solche Dienst

verlangen wollen haben werden sollen sein haette. (I don't

know what wollen haben werden sollen sein haette means,

but I notice they always put it at the end of a German

sentence--merely for general literary gorgeousness,

I suppose.)



This is a great and justly honored day--a day which is

worthy of the veneration in which it is held by the true

patriots of all climes and nationalities--a day which

offers a fruitful theme for thought and speech; und meinem

Freunde--no, meinEN FreundEN--meinES FreundES--well,

take your choice, they're all the same price; I don't

know which one is right--also! ich habe gehabt haben

worden gewesen sein, as Goethe says in his Paradise

Lost--ich--ich--that is to say--ich--but let us change cars.



Also! Die Anblich so viele Grossbrittanischer und Amerikanischer

hier zusammengetroffen in Bruderliche concord, ist zwar

a welcome and inspiriting spectacle.  And what has moved you

to it? Can the terse German tongue rise to the expression of

this impulse? Is it Freundschaftsbezeigungenstadtverordneten-

versammlungenfamilieneigenthuemlichkeiten? Nein,

o nein! This is a crisp and noble word, but it fails

to pierce the marrow of the impulse which has gathered

this friendly meeting and produced diese Anblick--eine

Anblich welche ist gut zu sehen--gut fuer die Augen

in a foreign land and a far country--eine Anblick solche

als in die gewoehnliche Heidelberger phrase nennt man ein

"schoenes Aussicht!" Ja, freilich natuerlich wahrscheinlich

ebensowohl! Also! Die Aussicht auf dem Koenigsstuhl

mehr groesser ist, aber geistlische sprechend nicht so

schoen, lob' Gott! Because sie sind hier zusammengetroffen,

in Bruderlichem concord, ein grossen Tag zu feirn,

whose high benefits were not for one land and one locality,

but have conferred a measure of good upon all lands

that know liberty today, and love it.  Hundert Jahre

vorueber, waren die Englaender und die Amerikaner Feinde;

aber heut sind sie herzlichen Freunde, Gott sei Dank!

May this good-fellowship endure; may these banners here

blended in amity so remain; may they never any more wave

over opposing hosts, or be stained with blood which

was kindred, is kindred, and always will be kindred,

until a line drawn upon a map shall be able to say:

"THIS bars the ancestral blood from flowing in the veins

of the descendant!"







APPENDIX E

Legend of the Castles



Called the "Swallow's Nest" and "The Brothers,"

as Condensed from the Captain's Tale



In the neighborhood of three hundred years ago the Swallow's

Nest and the larger castle between it and Neckarsteinach

were owned and occupied by two old knights who were

twin brothers, and bachelors.  They had no relatives.

They were very rich.  They had fought through the wars

and retired to private life--covered with honorable scars.

They were honest, honorable men in their dealings,

but the people had given them a couple of nicknames which

were very suggestive--Herr Givenaught and Herr Heartless.

The old knights were so proud of these names that if

a burgher called them by their right ones they would

correct them.



The most renowned scholar in Europe, at the time, was the

Herr Doctor Franz Reikmann, who lived in Heidelberg.

All Germany was proud of the venerable scholar, who lived

in the simplest way, for great scholars are always poor.

He was poor, as to money, but very rich in his sweet

young daughter Hildegarde and his library.  He had been

all his life collecting his library, book and book,

and he lived it as a miser loves his hoarded gold.

He said the two strings of his heart were rooted,

the one in his daughter, the other in his books; and that

if either were severed he must die.  Now in an evil hour,

hoping to win a marriage portion for his child, this simple

old man had entrusted his small savings to a sharper to be

ventured in a glittering speculation.  But that was not

the worst of it: he signed a paper--without reading it.

That is the way with poets and scholars; they always sign

without reading.  This cunning paper made him responsible

for heaps of things.  The rest was that one night he

found himself in debt to the sharper eight thousand

pieces of gold!--an amount so prodigious that it simply

stupefied him to think of it.  It was a night of woe in

that house.



"I must part with my library--I have nothing else.

So perishes one heartstring," said the old man.



"What will it bring, father?" asked the girl.



"Nothing! It is worth seven hundred pieces of gold;

but by auction it will go for little or nothing."



"Then you will have parted with the half of your heart

and the joy of your life to no purpose, since so mighty

of burden of debt will remain behind."



"There is no help for it, my child.  Our darlings must

pass under the hammer.  We must pay what we can."



"My father, I have a feeling that the dear Virgin will

come to our help.  Let us not lose heart."



"She cannot devise a miracle that will turn NOTHING into

eight thousand gold pieces, and lesser help will bring

us little peace."



"She can do even greater things, my father.  She will

save us, I know she will."



Toward morning, while the old man sat exhausted and asleep

in his chair where he had been sitting before his books

as one who watches by his beloved dead and prints the

features on his memory for a solace in the aftertime

of empty desolation, his daughter sprang into the room

and gently woke him, saying--



"My presentiment was true! She will save us.

Three times has she appeared to me in my dreams, and said,

'Go to the Herr Givenaught, go to the Herr Heartless,

ask them to come and bid.' There, did I not tell you she

would save us, the thrice blessed Virgin!"



Sad as the old man was, he was obliged to laugh.



"Thou mightest as well appeal to the rocks their

castles stand upon as to the harder ones that lie

in those men's breasts, my child.  THEY bid on books

writ in the learned tongues!--they can scarce read their own."



But Hildegarde's faith was in no wise shaken.

Bright and early she was on her way up the Neckar road,

as joyous as a bird.



Meantime Herr Givenaught and Herr Heartless were having

an early breakfast in the former's castle--the Sparrow's

Nest--and flavoring it with a quarrel; for although

these twins bore a love for each other which almost

amounted to worship, there was one subject upon which they

could not touch without calling each other hard names

--and yet it was the subject which they oftenest touched upon.



"I tell you," said Givenaught, "you will beggar yourself

yet with your insane squanderings of money upon

what you choose to consider poor and worthy objects.

All these years I have implored you to stop this foolish

custom and husband your means, but all in vain.

You are always lying to me about these secret benevolences,

but you never have managed to deceive me yet.  Every time

a poor devil has been set upon his feet I have detected

your hand in it--incorrigible ass!"



"Every time you didn't set him on his feet yourself,

you mean.  Where I give one unfortunate a little private lift,

you do the same for a dozen.  The idea of YOUR swelling

around the country and petting yourself with the nickname

of Givenaught--intolerable humbug! Before I would be

such a fraud as that, I would cut my right hand off.

Your life is a continual lie.  But go on, I have tried MY

best to save you from beggaring yourself by your riotous

charities--now for the thousandth time I wash my hands

of the consequences.  A maundering old fool! that's

what you are."



"And you a blethering old idiot!" roared Givenaught,

springing up.



"I won't stay in the presence of a man who has no more

delicacy than to call me such names.  Mannerless swine!"



So saying, Herr Heartless sprang up in a passion.

But some lucky accident intervened, as usual, to change

the subject, and the daily quarrel ended in the customary

daily living reconciliation.  The gray-headed old

eccentrics parted, and Herr Heartless walked off to his

own castle.



Half an hour later, Hildegarde was standing in the presence

of Herr Givenaught.  He heard her story, and said--



"I am sorry for you, my child, but I am very poor,

I care nothing for bookish rubbish, I shall not be there."



He said the hard words kindly, but they nearly broke poor

Hildegarde's heart, nevertheless.  When she was gone

the old heartbreaker muttered, rubbing his hands--



"It was a good stroke.  I have saved my brother's pocket

this time, in spite of him.  Nothing else would have

prevented his rushing off to rescue the old scholar,

the pride of Germany, from his trouble.  The poor child

won't venture near HIM after the rebuff she has received

from his brother the Givenaught."



But he was mistaken.  The Virgin had commanded,

and Hildegarde would obey.  She went to Herr Heartless

and told her story.  But he said coldly--



"I am very poor, my child, and books are nothing to me.

I wish you well, but I shall not come."



When Hildegarde was gone, he chuckled and said--



"How my fool of a soft-headed soft-hearted brother would

rage if he knew how cunningly I have saved his pocket.

How he would have flown to the old man's rescue! But the

girl won't venture near him now."



When Hildegarde reached home, her father asked her how she

had prospered.  She said--



"The Virgin has promised, and she will keep her word;

but not in the way I thought.  She knows her own ways,

and they are best."



The old man patted her on the head, and smiled a doubting

smile, but he honored her for her brave faith, nevertheless.



II



Next day the people assembled in the great hall

of the Ritter tavern, to witness the auction--for

the proprietor had said the treasure of Germany's most

honored son should be bartered away in no meaner place.

Hildegarde and her father sat close to the books,

silent and sorrowful, and holding each other's hands.

There was a great crowd of people present.  The bidding began--



"How much for this precious library, just as it stands,

all complete?" called the auctioneer.



"Fifty pieces of gold!"



"A hundred!"



"Two hundred."



"Three!"



"Four!"



"Five hundred!"



"Five twenty-five."



A brief pause.



"Five forty!"



A longer pause, while the auctioneer redoubled his persuasions.



