sixteen miles, and sat up till nearly daylight, Eng dropped asleep, from

sheer exhaustion, and then the question was asked and answered.  The

lovers were married.  All acquainted with the circumstance applauded the

noble brother-in-law.  His unwavering faithfulness was the theme of every

tongue.  He had stayed by them all through their long and arduous

courtship; and when at last they were married, he lifted his hands above

their heads, and said with impressive unction, "Bless ye, my children, I

will never desert ye!" and he kept his word.  Fidelity like this is all

too rare in this cold world.



By and by Eng fell in love with his sister-in-law's sister, and married

her, and since that day they have all lived together, night and day, in

an exceeding sociability which is touching and beautiful to behold, and

is a scathing rebuke to our boasted civilization.



The sympathy existing between these two brothers is so close and so

refined that the feelings, the impulses, the emotions of the one are

instantly experienced by the other.  When one is sick, the other is sick;

when one feels pain, the other feels it; when one is angered, the other's

temper takes fire.  We have already seen with what happy facility they

both fell in love with the same girl.  Now Chang is bitterly opposed to

all forms of intemperance, on principle; but Eng is the reverse--for,

while these men's feelings and emotions are so closely wedded, their

reasoning faculties are unfettered; their thoughts are free.  Chang

belongs to the Good Templars, and is a hard--working, enthusiastic

supporter of all temperance reforms.  But, to his bitter distress, every

now and then Eng gets drunk, and, of course, that makes Chang drunk too.

This unfortunate thing has been a great sorrow to Chang, for it almost

destroys his usefulness in his favorite field of effort.  As sure as he

is to head a great temperance procession Eng ranges up alongside of him,

prompt to the minute, and drunk as a lord; but yet no more dismally and

hopelessly drunk than his brother, who has not tasted a drop.  And so the

two begin to hoot and yell, and throw mud and bricks at the Good

Templars; and, of course, they break up the procession.  It would be

manifestly wrong to punish Chang for what Eng does, and, therefore, the

Good Templars accept the untoward situation, and suffer in silence and

sorrow.  They have officially and deliberately examined into the matter,

and find Chang blameless.  They have taken the two brothers and filled

Chang full of warm water and sugar and Eng full of whisky, and in

twenty-five minutes it was not possible to tell which was the drunkest.

Both were as drunk as loons--and on hot whisky punches, by the smell of

their breath.  Yet all the while Chang's moral principles were unsullied,

his conscience clear; and so all just men were forced to confess that he

was not morally, but only physically, drunk.  By every right and by every

moral evidence the man was strictly sober; and, therefore, it caused his

friends all the more anguish to see him shake hands with the pump and try

to wind his watch with his night-key.



There is a moral in these solemn warnings--or, at least, a warning in

these solemn morals; one or the other.  No matter, it is somehow.  Let us

heed it; let us profit by it.



I could say more of an instructive nature about these interesting beings,

but let what I have written suffice.



Having forgotten to mention it sooner, I will remark in conclusion that

the ages of the Siamese Twins are respectively fifty-one and fifty-three

years.













SPEECH AT THE SCOTTISH BANQUET IN LONDON--[Written about 1872.]



On the anniversary festival of the Scottish Corporation of London on

Monday evening, in response to the toast of "The Ladies," MARK TWAIN

replied.  The following is his speech as reported in the London Observer:



I am proud, indeed, of the distinction of being chosen to respond to this

especial toast, to 'The Ladies,' or to women if you please, for that is

the preferable term, perhaps; it is certainly the older, and therefore

the more entitled to reverence [Laughter.]  I have noticed that the

Bible, with that plain, blunt honesty which is such a conspicuous

characteristic of the Scriptures, is always particular to never refer to

even the illustrious mother of all mankind herself as a 'lady,' but

speaks of her as a woman, [Laughter.]  It is odd, but you will find it is

so.  I am peculiarly proud of this honor, because I think that the toast

to women is one which, by right and by every rule of gallantry, should

take precedence of all others--of the army, of the navy, of even royalty

itself perhaps, though the latter is not necessary in this day and in

this land, for the reason that, tacitly, you do drink a broad general

health to all good women when you drink the health of the Queen of

England and the Princess of Wales.  [Loud cheers.]  I have in mind a poem

just now which is familiar to you all, familiar to everybody.  And what

an inspiration that was (and how instantly the present toast recalls the

verses to all our minds) when the most noble, the most gracious, the

purest, and sweetest of all poets says:



                         "Woman!  O woman!--er--

                         Wom--"



[Laughter.]  However, you remember the lines; and you remember how

feelingly, how daintily, how almost imperceptibly the verses raise up

before you, feature by feature, the ideal of a true and perfect woman;

and how, as you contemplate the finished marvel, your homage grows into

worship of the intellect that could create so fair a thing out of mere

breath, mere words.  And you call to mind now, as I speak, how the poet,

with stern fidelity to the history of all humanity, delivers this

beautiful child of his heart and his brain over to the trials and sorrows

that must come to all, sooner or later, that abide in the earth, and how

the pathetic story culminates in that apostrophe--so wild, so regretful,

so full of mournful retrospection.  The lines run thus:



                    "Alas!--alas!--a--alas!

                    ----Alas!--------alas!"



--and so on.  [Laughter.] I do not remember the rest; but, taken

together, it seems to me that poem is the noblest tribute to woman that

human genius has ever brought forth--[laughter]--and I feel that if I

were to talk hours I could not do my great theme completer or more

graceful justice than I have now done in simply quoting that poet's

matchless words.  [Renewed laughter.] The phases of the womanly nature

are infinite in their variety.  Take any type of woman, and you shall

find in it something to respect, something to admire, something to love.

And you shall find the whole joining you heart and hand.  Who was more

patriotic than Joan of Arc?  Who was braver?  Who has given us a grander

instance of self-sacrificing devotion?  Ah! you remember, you remember

well, what a throb of pain, what a great tidal wave of grief swept over

us all when Joan of Arc fell at Waterloo.  [Much laughter.]  Who does not

sorrow for the loss of Sappho, the sweet singer of Israel?  [Laughter.]

Who among us does not miss the gentle ministrations, the softening

influences, the humble piety of Lucretia Borgia?  [Laughter.]  Who can

join in the heartless libel that says woman is extravagant in dress when

he can look back and call to mind our simple and lowly mother Eve arrayed

in her modification of the Highland costume.  [Roars of laughter.]

Sir, women have been soldiers, women have been painters, women have been

poets.  As long as language lives the name of Cleopatra will live.



And, not because she conquered George III. [laughter]--but because she

wrote those divine lines:



                    "Let dogs delight to bark and bite,

                    For God hath made them so."



[More laughter.]  The story of the world is adorned with the names of

illustrious ones of our own sex--some of them sons of St.  Andrew, too

--Scott, Bruce, Burns, the warrior Wallace, Ben Nevis--[laughter]--the

gifted Ben Lomond, and the great new Scotchman, Ben Disraeli.  [Great

laughter.]  Out of the great plains of history tower whole mountain

ranges of sublime women--the Queen of Sheba, Josephine, Semiramis, Sairey

Gamp; the list is endless--[laughter]--but I will not call the mighty

roll, the names rise up in your own memories at the mere suggestion,

luminous with the glory of deeds that cannot die, hallowed by the loving

worship of the good and the true of all epochs and all climes.  [Cheers.]

Suffice it for our pride and our honor that we in our day have added to

it such names as those of Grace Darling and Florence Nightingale.

[Cheers.]  Woman is all that she should be-gentle, patient, long

suffering, trustful, unselfish, full of generous impulses.  It is her

blessed mission to comfort the sorrowing, plead for the erring, encourage

the faint of purpose, succor the distressed, uplift the fallen, befriend

the friendless in a word, afford the healing of her sympathies and a home

in her heart for all the bruised and persecuted children of misfortune

that knock at its hospitable door. [Cheers.]  And when I say, God bless

her, there is none among us who has known the ennobling affection of a

wife, or the steadfast devotion of a mother, but in his heart will say,

Amen!  [Loud and prolonged cheering.]



--[Mr.  Benjamin Disraeli, at that time Prime Minister of England, had

just been elected Lord Rector of Glasgow University, and had made a

speech which gave rise to a world of discussion.]













A GHOST STORY



I took a large room, far up Broadway, in a huge old building whose upper

stories had been wholly unoccupied for years until I came.  The place had

long been given up to dust and cobwebs, to solitude and silence.

I seemed groping among the tombs and invading the privacy of the dead,

that first night I climbed up to my quarters.  For the first time in my

life a superstitious dread came over me; and as I turned a dark angle of

the stairway and an invisible cobweb swung its slazy woof in my face and

clung there, I shuddered as one who had encountered a phantom.



I was glad enough when I reached my room and locked out the mold and the

darkness.  A cheery fire was burning in the grate, and I sat down before

it with a comforting sense of relief.  For two hours I sat there,

thinking of bygone times; recalling old scenes, and summoning

half-forgotten faces out of the mists of the past; listening, in fancy,

to voices that long ago grew silent for all time, and to once familiar

songs that nobody sings now.  And as my reverie softened down to a sadder

and sadder pathos, the shrieking of the winds outside softened to a wail,

the angry beating of the rain against the panes diminished to a tranquil

patter, and one by one the noises in the street subsided, until the

hurrying footsteps of the last belated straggler died away in the

distance and left no sound behind.



The fire had burned low.  A sense of loneliness crept over me.  I arose

and undressed, moving on tiptoe about the room, doing stealthily what I

had to do, as if I were environed by sleeping enemies whose slumbers it

would be fatal to break.  I covered up in bed, and lay listening to the

rain and wind and the faint creaking of distant shutters, till they

lulled me to sleep.



I slept profoundly, but how long I do not know.  All at once I found

myself awake, and filled with a shuddering expectancy.  All was still.

All but my own heart--I could hear it beat.  Presently the bedclothes

began to slip away slowly toward the foot of the bed, as if some one were

pulling them!  I could not stir; I could not speak.  Still the blankets

slipped deliberately away, till my breast was uncovered.  Then with a

great effort I seized them and drew them over my head.  I waited,

listened, waited.  Once more that steady pull began, and once more I lay

torpid a century of dragging seconds till my breast was naked again.  At

last I roused my energies and snatched the covers back to their place and

held them with a strong grip.  I waited.  By and by I felt a faint tug,

and took a fresh grip.  The tug strengthened to a steady strain--it grew

stronger and stronger.  My hold parted, and for the third time the

blankets slid away.  I groaned.  An answering groan came from the foot of

the bed!  Beaded drops of sweat stood upon my forehead.  I was more dead

than alive.  Presently I heard a heavy footstep in my room--the step of

an elephant, it seemed to me--it was not like anything human.  But it was

moving from me--there was relief in that.  I heard it approach the door

--pass out without moving bolt or lock--and wander away among the dismal

corridors, straining the floors and joists till they creaked again as it

passed--and then silence reigned once more.



When my excitement had calmed, I said to myself, "This is a dream--simply

a hideous dream."  And so I lay thinking it over until I convinced myself

that it was a dream, and then a comforting laugh relaxed my lips and I

was happy again.  I got up and struck a light; and when I found that the

locks and bolts were just as I had left them, another soothing laugh

welled in my heart and rippled from my lips.  I took my pipe and lit it,

and was just sitting down before the fire, when-down went the pipe out of

my nerveless fingers, the blood forsook my cheeks, and my placid

breathing was cut short with a gasp!  In the ashes on the hearth, side by

side with my own bare footprint, was another, so vast that in comparison

mine was but an infant's!  Then I had had a visitor, and the elephant

tread was explained.



I put out the light and returned to bed, palsied with fear.  I lay a long

time, peering into the darkness, and listening.--Then I heard a grating

noise overhead, like the dragging of a heavy body across the floor; then

the throwing down of the body, and the shaking of my windows in response

to the concussion.  In distant parts of the building I heard the muffled

slamming of doors.  I heard, at intervals, stealthy footsteps creeping in

and out among the corridors, and up and down the stairs.  Sometimes these

noises approached my door, hesitated, and went away again.  I heard the

clanking of chains faintly, in remote passages, and listened while the

clanking grew nearer--while it wearily climbed the stairways, marking

each move by the loose surplus of chain that fell with an accented rattle

upon each succeeding step as the goblin that bore it advanced.  I heard

muttered sentences; half-uttered screams that seemed smothered violently;

and the swish of invisible garments, the rush of invisible wings.  Then I

became conscious that my chamber was invaded--that I was not alone.

I heard sighs and breathings about my bed, and mysterious whisperings.

Three little spheres of soft phosphorescent light appeared on the ceiling

directly over my head, clung and glowed there a moment, and then dropped

--two of them upon my face and one upon the pillow.  They, spattered,

liquidly, and felt warm.  Intuition told me they had--turned to gouts of

blood as they fell--I needed no light to satisfy myself of that.  Then I

saw pallid faces, dimly luminous, and white uplifted hands, floating

bodiless in the air--floating a moment and then disappearing.

The whispering ceased, and the voices and the sounds, anal a solemn

stillness followed.  I waited and listened.  I felt that I must have

light or die.  I was weak with fear.  I slowly raised myself toward a

sitting posture, and my face came in contact with a clammy hand!

All strength went from me apparently, and I fell back like a stricken

invalid.  Then I heard the rustle of a garment it seemed to pass to the

door and go out.



When everything was still once more, I crept out of bed, sick and feeble,

and lit the gas with a hand that trembled as if it were aged with a

hundred years.  The light brought some little cheer to my spirits.  I sat

down and fell into a dreamy contemplation of that great footprint in the

ashes.  By and by its outlines began to waver and grow dim.  I glanced up

and the broad gas-flame was slowly wilting away.  In the same moment I

heard that elephantine tread again.  I noted its approach, nearer and

nearer, along the musty halls, and dimmer and dimmer the light waned.

The tread reached my very door and paused--the light had dwindled to a

sickly blue, and all things about me lay in a spectral twilight.  The

door did not open, and yet I felt a faint gust of air fan my cheek, and

presently was conscious of a huge, cloudy presence before me.  I watched

it with fascinated eyes.  A pale glow stole over the Thing; gradually its

cloudy folds took shape--an arm appeared, then legs, then a body, and

last a great sad face looked out of the vapor.  Stripped of its filmy

housings, naked, muscular and comely, the majestic Cardiff Giant loomed

above me!



All my misery vanished--for a child might know that no harm could come

with that benignant countenance.  My cheerful spirits returned at once,

and in sympathy with them the gas flamed up brightly again.  Never a

lonely outcast was so glad to welcome company as I was to greet the

friendly giant.  I said:



"Why, is it nobody but you?  Do you know, I have been scared to death for

the last two or three hours?  I am most honestly glad to see you.  I wish

I had a chair--Here, here, don't try to sit down in that thing--"



But it was too late.  He was in it before I could stop him and down he

went--I never saw a chair shivered so in my life.



"Stop, stop, you'll ruin ev--"



Too late again.  There was another crash, and another chair was resolved

into its original elements.



"Confound it, haven't you got any judgment at' all?  Do you want to ruin

all the furniture on the place?  Here, here, you petrified fool--"



But it was no use.  Before I could arrest him he had sat down on the bed,

and it was a melancholy ruin.



"Now what sort of a way is that to do?  First you come lumbering about

the place bringing a legion of vagabond goblins along with you to worry

me to death, and then when I overlook an indelicacy of costume which

would not be tolerated anywhere by cultivated people except in a

respectable theater, and not even there if the nudity were of your sex,

you repay me by wrecking all the furniture you can find to sit down on.

And why will you?  You damage yourself as much as you do me.  You have

broken off the end of your spinal column, and littered up the floor with

chips of your hams till the place looks like a marble yard.  You ought to

be ashamed of yourself--you are big enough to know better."



"Well, I will not break any more furniture.  But what am I to do?  I have

not had a chance to sit down for a century."  And the tears came into his

eyes.



"Poor devil," I said, "I should not have been so harsh with you.  And you

are an orphan, too, no doubt.  But sit down on the floor here--nothing

else can stand your weight--and besides, we cannot be sociable with you

away up there above me; I want you down where I can perch on this high

counting-house stool and gossip with you face to face."  So he sat down

on the floor, and lit a pipe which I gave him, threw one of my red

blankets over his shoulders, inverted my sitz-bath on his head, helmet

fashion, and made himself picturesque and comfortable.  Then he crossed

his ankles, while I renewed the fire, and exposed the flat, honeycombed

bottoms of his prodigious feet to the grateful warmth.



"What is the matter with the bottom of your feet and the back of your

legs, that they are gouged up so?"



"Infernal chilblains--I caught them clear up to the back of my head,

roosting out there under Newell's farm.  But I love the place; I love it

as one loves his old home.  There is no peace for me like the peace I

feel when I am there."



We talked along for half an hour, and then I noticed that he looked

tired, and spoke of it.



"Tired?" he said.  "Well, I should think so.  And now I will tell you all

about it, since you have treated me so well.  I am the spirit of the

Petrified Man that lies across the street there in the museum. I am the

ghost of the Cardiff Giant.  I can have no rest, no peace, till they have

given that poor body burial again.  Now what was the most natural thing

for me to do, to make men satisfy this wish?  Terrify them into it!

haunt the place where the body lay!  So I haunted the museum night after

night.  I even got other spirits to help me.  But it did no good, for

nobody ever came to the museum at midnight.  Then it occurred to me to

come over the way and haunt this place a little.  I felt that if I ever

got a hearing I must succeed, for I had the most efficient company that

perdition could furnish.  Night after night we have shivered around

through these mildewed halls, dragging chains, groaning, whispering,

tramping up and down stairs, till, to tell you the truth, I am almost

worn out.  But when I saw a light in your room to-night I roused my

energies again and went at it with a deal of the old freshness.  But I am

tired out--entirely fagged out.  Give me, I beseech you, give me some

hope!"  I lit off my perch in a burst of excitement, and exclaimed:



"This transcends everything! everything that ever did occur!  Why you

poor blundering old fossil, you have had all your trouble for nothing

--you have been haunting a plaster cast of yourself--the real Cardiff

Giant is in Albany!--[A fact.  The original fraud was ingeniously and

fraudfully duplicated, and exhibited in New York as the "only genuine"

Cardiff Giant (to the unspeakable disgust of the owners of the real

colossus) at the very same time that the latter was drawing crowds at a

museum is Albany,]--Confound it, don't you know your own remains?"



I never saw such an eloquent look of shame, of pitiable humiliation,

overspread a countenance before.



The Petrified Man rose slowly to his feet, and said:



"Honestly, is that true?"



"As true as I am sitting here."



He took the pipe from his mouth and laid it on the mantel, then stood

irresolute a moment (unconsciously, from old habit, thrusting his hands

where his pantaloons pockets should have been, and meditatively dropping

his chin on his breast); and finally said:



"Well-I never felt so absurd before.  The Petrified Man has sold

everybody else, and now the mean fraud has ended by selling its own

ghost!  My son, if there is any charity left in your heart for a poor

friendless phantom like me, don't let this get out.  Think how you would

feel if you had made such an ass of yourself."



I heard his stately tramp die away, step by step down the stairs and out

into the deserted street, and felt sorry that he was gone, poor fellow

--and sorrier still that he had carried off my red blanket and my

bath-tub.













THE CAPITOLINE VENUS



CHAPTER I



[Scene-An Artist's Studio in Rome.]



"Oh, George, I do love you!"



"Bless your dear heart, Mary, I know that--why is your father so

obdurate?"



"George, he means well, but art is folly to him--he only understands

groceries.  He thinks you would starve me."



"Confound his wisdom--it savors of inspiration.  Why am I not a

money-making bowelless grocer, instead of a divinely gifted sculptor

with nothing to eat?"



"Do not despond, Georgy, dear--all his prejudices will fade away as soon

as you shall have acquired fifty thousand dol--"



"Fifty thousand demons!  Child, I am in arrears for my board!"







CHAPTER II



[Scene-A Dwelling in Rome.]



"My dear sir, it is useless to talk.  I haven't anything against you, but

I can't let my daughter marry a hash of love, art, and starvation--I

believe you have nothing else to offer."



"Sir, I am poor, I grant you.  But is fame nothing?  The Hon. Bellamy

Foodle of Arkansas says that my new statue of America, is a clever piece

of sculpture, and he is satisfied that my name will one day be famous."



"Bosh!  What does that Arkansas ass know about it?  Fame's nothing--the

market price of your marble scarecrow is the thing to look at.  It took

you six months to chisel it, and you can't sell it for a hundred dollars.

No, sir!  Show me fifty thousand dollars and you can have my daughter

--otherwise she marries young Simper.  You have just six months to raise

the money in.  Good morning, sir."



"Alas!  Woe is me!"







CHAPTER III



[ Scene-The Studio.]



"Oh, John, friend of my boyhood, I am the unhappiest of men."



"You're a simpleton!"



"I have nothing left to love but my poor statue of America--and see, even

she has no sympathy for me in her cold marble countenance--so beautiful

and so heartless!"



"You're a dummy!"



"Oh, John!"



Oh, fudge!  Didn't you say you had six months to raise the money in?"



"Don't deride my agony, John.  If I had six centuries what good would it

do?  How could it help a poor wretch without name, capital, or friends?"



"Idiot!  Coward!  Baby!  Six months to raise the money in--and five will

do!"



"Are you insane?"



"Six months--an abundance.  Leave it to me.  I'll raise it."



"What do you mean, John?  How on earth can you raise such a monstrous sum

for me?"



"Will you let that be my business, and not meddle?  Will you leave the

thing in my hands?  Will you swear to submit to whatever I do?  Will you

pledge me to find no fault with my actions?"



"I am dizzy--bewildered--but I swear."



John took up a hammer and deliberately smashed the nose of America!  He

made another pass and two of her fingers fell to the floor--another, and

part of an ear came away--another, and a row of toes was mangled and

dismembered--another, and the left leg, from the knee down, lay a

fragmentary ruin!



John put on his hat and departed.



George gazed speechless upon the battered and grotesque nightmare before

him for the space of thirty seconds, and then wilted to the floor and

went into convulsions.



John returned presently with a carriage, got the broken-hearted artist

and the broken-legged statue aboard, and drove off, whistling low and

tranquilly.



He left the artist at his lodgings, and drove off and disappeared down

the Via Quirinalis with the statue.







CHAPTER IV



[Scene--The Studio.]



"The six months will be up at two o'clock to-day!  Oh, agony!  My life is

blighted.  I would that I were dead.  I had no supper yesterday.  I have

had no breakfast to-day.  I dare not enter an eating-house.  And hungry?

--don't mention it!  My bootmaker duns me to death--my tailor duns me

--my landlord haunts me.  I am miserable.  I haven't seen John since that

awful day.  She smiles on me tenderly when we meet in the great

thoroughfares, but her old flint of a father makes her look in the other

direction in short order.  Now who is knocking at that door?  Who is come

to persecute me?  That malignant villain the bootmaker, I'll warrant.

Come in!"



"Ah, happiness attend your highness--Heaven be propitious to your grace!

I have brought my lord's new boots--ah, say nothing about the pay, there

is no hurry, none in the world.  Shall be proud if my noble lord will

continue to honor me with his custom--ah, adieu!"



"Brought the boots himself!  Don't wait his pay!  Takes his leave with a

bow and a scrape fit to honor majesty withal!  Desires a continuance of

my custom!  Is the world coming to an end?  Of all the--come in!"



"Pardon, signore, but I have brought your new suit of clothes for--"



"Come in!"



"A thousand pardons for this intrusion, your worship.  But I have

prepared the beautiful suite of rooms below for you--this wretched den is

but ill suited to--"



"Come in!"



"I have called to say that your credit at our bank, some time since

unfortunately interrupted, is entirely and most satisfactorily restored,

and we shall be most happy if you will draw upon us for any--"



"COME IN!"



"My noble boy, she is yours!  She'll be here in a moment!  Take her

--marry her--love her--be happy!--God bless you both!  Hip, hip, hur--"



"COME IN!!!!!"



"Oh, George, my own darling, we are saved!"



"Oh, Mary, my own darling, we are saved--but I'll swear I don't know why

nor how!"







CHAPTER V



[Scene-A Roman Cafe.]



One of a group of American gentlemen reads and translates from the weekly

edition of 'Il Slangwhanger di Roma' as follows:



WONDERFUL DISCOVERY--Some six months ago Signor John Smitthe, an American

gentleman now some years a resident of Rome, purchased for a trifle a

small piece of ground in the Campagna, just beyond the tomb of the Scipio

family, from the owner, a bankrupt relative of the Princess Borghese.

Mr. Smitthe afterward went to the Minister of the Public Records and had

the piece of ground transferred to a poor American artist named George

Arnold, explaining that he did it as payment and satisfaction for

pecuniary damage accidentally done by him long since upon property

belonging to Signor Arnold, and further observed that he would make

additional satisfaction by improving the ground for Signor A., at his own

charge and cost.  Four weeks ago, while making some necessary excavations

upon the property, Signor Smitthe unearthed the most remarkable ancient

statue that has ever bees added to the opulent art treasures of Rome.

It was an exquisite figure of a woman, and though sadly stained by the

soil and the mold of ages, no eye can look unmoved upon its ravishing

beauty.  The nose, the left leg from the knee down, an ear, and also the

toes of the right foot and two fingers of one of the hands were gone,

but otherwise the noble figure was in a remarkable state of preservation.

The government at once took military possession of the statue, and

appointed a commission of art-critics, antiquaries, and cardinal princes

of the church to assess its value and determine the remuneration that

must go to the owner of the ground in which it was found.  The whole

affair was kept a profound secret until last night.  In the mean time the

commission sat with closed doors and deliberated.  Last night they

decided unanimously that the statue is a Venus, and the work of some

unknown but sublimely gifted artist of the third century before Christ.

They consider it the most faultless work of art the world has any

knowledge of.



At midnight they held a final conference and, decided that the Venus was

worth the enormous sum of ten million francs!  In accordance with Roman

law and Roman usage, the government being half-owner in all works of art

found in the Campagna, the State has naught to do but pay five million

francs to Mr.  Arnold and take permanent possession of the beautiful

statue.  This morning the Venus will be removed to the Capitol, there to

remain, and at noon the commission will wait upon Signor Arnold with His

Holiness the Pope's order upon the Treasury for the princely sum of five

million francs is gold!



Chorus of Voices.--"Luck!  It's no name for it!"



Another Voice.--"Gentlemen, I propose that we immediately form an

American joint-stock company for the purchase of lands and excavations of

statues here, with proper connections in Wall Street to bull and bear the

stock."



All.--"Agreed."







CHAPTER VI



[Scene--The Roman Capitol Ten Years Later.]



"Dearest Mary, this is the most celebrated statue in the world.  This is

the renowned 'Capitoline Venus' you've heard so much about.  Here she is

with her little blemishes 'restored' (that is, patched) by the most noted

Roman artists--and the mere fact that they did the humble patching of so

noble a creation will make their names illustrious while the world

stands.  How strange it seems this place!  The day before I last stood

here, ten happy years ago, I wasn't a rich man bless your soul, I hadn't

a cent.  And yet I had a good deal to do with making Rome mistress of

this grandest work of ancient art the world contains."



"The worshiped, the illustrious Capitoline Venus--and what a sum she is

valued at!  Ten millions of francs!"



"Yes--now she is."



"And oh, Georgy, how divinely beautiful she is!"



"Ah, yes but nothing to what she was before that blessed John Smith broke

her leg and battered her nose.  Ingenious Smith!--gifted Smith!--noble

Smith!  Author of all our bliss!  Hark!  Do you know what that wheeze

means?  Mary, that cub has got the whooping-cough.  Will you never learn

to take care of the children!"



THE END





The Capitoline Venus is still in the Capitol at Rome, and is still the

most charming and most illustrious work of ancient art the world can

boast of.  But if ever it shall be your fortune to stand before it and go

into the customary ecstasies over it, don't permit this true and secret

history of its origin to mar your bliss--and when you read about a

gigantic Petrified man being dug up near Syracuse, in the State of New

York, or near any other place, keep your own counsel--and if the Barnum

that buried him there offers to sell to you at an enormous sum, don't you

buy.  Send him to the Pope!





[NOTE.--The above sketch was written at the time the famous swindle of

the "Petrified Giant" was the sensation of the day in the United States]













SPEECH ON ACCIDENT INSURANCE



DELIVERED IN HARTFORD, AT A DINNER TO CORNELIUS WALFORD, OF LONDON



GENTLEMEN: I am glad, indeed, to assist in welcoming the distinguished

guest of this occasion to a city whose fame as an insurance center has

extended to all lands, and given us the name of being a quadruple band of

brothers working sweetly hand in hand--the Colt's Arms Company making the

destruction of our race easy and convenient, our life insurance citizens

paying for the victims when they pass away, Mr. Batterson perpetuating

their memory with his stately monuments, and our fire-insurance comrades

taking care of their hereafter.  I am glad to assist in welcoming our

guest first, because he is an Englishman, and I owe a heavy debt of

hospitality to certain of his fellow-countrymen; and secondly, because he

is in sympathy with insurance and has been the means of making may other

men cast their sympathies in the same direction.



Certainly there is no nobler field for human effort than the insurance

line of business--especially accident insurance.  Ever since I have been

a director in an accident-insurance company I have felt that I am a

better man.  Life has seemed more precious.  Accidents have assumed a

kindlier aspect.  Distressing special providences have lost half their

horror.  I look upon a cripple now with affectionate interest--as an

advertisement.  I do not seem to care for poetry any more.  I do not care

for politics--even agriculture does not excite me.  But to me now there

is a charm about a railway collision that is unspeakable.



There is nothing more beneficent than accident insurance.  I have seen an

entire family lifted out of poverty and into affluence by the simple boon

of a broken leg.  I have had people come to me on crutches, with tears in

their eyes, to bless this beneficent institution.  In all my experience

of life, I have seen nothing so seraphic as the look that comes into a

freshly mutilated man's face when he feels in his vest pocket with his

remaining hand and finds his accident ticket all right.  And I have seen

nothing so sad as the look that came into another splintered customer's

face when he found he couldn't collect on a wooden leg.



I will remark here, by way of advertisement, that that noble charity

which we have named the HARTFORD ACCIDENT INSURANCE COMPANY--[The

speaker is a director of the company named.]--is an institution which is

peculiarly to be depended upon.  A man is bound to prosper who gives it

his custom.



No man can take out a policy in it and not get crippled before the year

is out.  Now there was one indigent man who had been disappointed so

often with other companies that he had grown disheartened, his appetite

left him, he ceased to smile--life was but a weariness.  Three weeks ago

I got him to insure with us, and now he is the brightest, happiest spirit

in this land has a good steady income and a stylish suit of new bandages

every day, and travels around on a shutter.



I will say, in conclusion, that my share of the welcome to our guest is

none the less hearty because I talk so much nonsense, and I know that I

can say the same for the rest of the speakers.













JOHN CHINAMAN IN NEW YORK



As I passed along by one of those monster American tea stores in New

York, I found a Chinaman sitting before it acting in the capacity of a

sign.  Everybody that passed by gave him a steady stare as long as their

heads would twist over their shoulders without dislocating their necks,

and a group had stopped to stare deliberately.



Is it not a shame that we, who prate so much about civilization and

humanity, are content to degrade a fellow-being to such an office as

this?  Is it not time for reflection when we find ourselves willing to

see in such a being matter for frivolous curiosity instead of regret and

grave reflection?  Here was a poor creature whom hard fortune had exiled

from his natural home beyond the seas, and whose troubles ought to have

touched these idle strangers that thronged about him; but did it?

Apparently not.  Men calling themselves the superior race, the race of

culture and of gentle blood, scanned his quaint Chinese hat, with peaked

roof and ball on top, and his long queue dangling down his back; his

short silken blouse, curiously frogged and figured (and, like the rest of

his raiment, rusty, dilapidated, and awkwardly put on); his blue cotton,

tight-legged pants, tied close around the ankles; and his clumsy

blunt-toed shoes with thick cork soles; and having so scanned him from

head to foot, cracked some unseemly joke about his outlandish attire or

his melancholy face, and passed on.  In my heart I pitied the friendless

Mongol.  I wondered what was passing behind his sad face, and what

distant scene his vacant eye was dreaming of.  Were his thoughts with his

heart, ten thousand miles away, beyond the billowy wastes of the Pacific?

among the ricefields and the plumy palms of China? under the shadows of

remembered mountain peaks, or in groves of bloomy shrubs and strange

forest trees unknown to climes like ours?  And now and then, rippling

among his visions and his dreams, did he hear familiar laughter and

half-forgotten voices, and did he catch fitful glimpses of the friendly

faces of a bygone time?  A cruel fate it is, I said, that is befallen

this bronzed wanderer.  In order that the group of idlers might be

touched at least by the words of the poor fellow, since the appeal of his

pauper dress and his dreary exile was lost upon them, I touched him on

the shoulder and said:



"Cheer up--don't be downhearted.  It is not America that treats you in

this way, it is merely one citizen, whose greed of gain has eaten the

humanity out of his heart.  America has a broader hospitality for the

exiled and oppressed.  America and Americans are always ready to help the

unfortunate.  Money shall be raised--you shall go back to China you shall

see your friends again.  What wages do they pay you here?"



"Divil a cint but four dollars a week and find meself; but it's aisy,

barrin' the troublesome furrin clothes that's so expinsive."



The exile remains at his post.  The New York tea merchants who need

picturesque signs are not likely to run out of Chinamen.













HOW I EDITED AN AGRICULTURAL PAPER--[Written abort 1870.]



I did not take temporary editorship of an agricultural paper without

misgivings.  Neither would a landsman take command of a ship without

misgivings.  But I was in circumstances that made the salary an object.

The regular editor of the paper was going off for a holiday, and I

accepted the terms he offered, and took his place.



The sensation of being at work again was luxurious, and I wrought all the

week with unflagging pleasure.  We went to press, and I waited a day with

some solicitude to see whether my effort was going to attract any notice.

As I left the office, toward sundown, a group of men and boys at the foot

of the stairs dispersed with one impulse, and gave me passageway, and I

heard one or two of them say: "That's him!"  I was naturally pleased by

this incident.  The next morning I found a similar group at the foot of

the stairs, and scattering couples and individuals standing here and

there in the street and over the way, watching me with interest.  The

group separated and fell back as I approached, and I heard a man say,

"Look at his eye!"  I pretended not to observe the notice I was

attracting, but secretly I was pleased with it, and was purposing to

write an account of it to my aunt.  I went up the short flight of stairs,

and heard cheery voices and a ringing laugh as I drew near the door,

which I opened, and caught a glimpse of two young rural-looking men,

whose faces blanched and lengthened when they saw me, and then they both

plunged through the window with a great crash.  I was surprised.



In about half an hour an old gentleman, with a flowing beard and a fine

but rather austere face, entered, and sat down at my invitation.  He

seemed to have something on his mind.  He took off his hat and set it on

the floor, and got out of it a red silk handkerchief and a copy of our

paper.



He put the paper on his lap, and while he polished his spectacles with

his handkerchief he said, "Are you the new editor?"



I said I was.



"Have you ever edited an agricultural paper before?"



"No," I said; "this is my first attempt."



"Very likely.  Have you had any experience in agriculture practically?"



"No; I believe I have not."



"Some instinct told me so," said the old gentleman, putting on his

spectacles, and looking over them at me with asperity, while he folded

his paper into a convenient shape.  "I wish to read you what must have

made me have that instinct.  It was this editorial.  Listen, and see if

it was you that wrote it:



     "'Turnips should never be pulled, it injures them.  It is much

     better to send a boy up and let him shake the tree.'



"Now, what do you think of that? for I really suppose you wrote it?"



"Think of it?  Why, I think it is good.  I think it is sense.  I have no

doubt that every year millions and millions of bushels of turnips are

spoiled in this township alone by being pulled in a half-ripe condition,

when, if they had sent a boy up to shake the tree--"



"Shake your grandmother!  Turnips don't grow on trees!"



"Oh, they don't, don't they?  Well, who said they did?  The language was

intended to be figurative, wholly figurative.  Anybody that knows

anything will know that I meant that the boy should shake the vine."



Then this old person got up and tore his paper all into small shreds, and

stamped on them, and broke several things with his cane, and said I did

not know as much as a cow; and then went--out and banged the door after

him, and, in short, acted in such a way that I fancied he was displeased

about something.  But not knowing what the trouble was, I could not be

any help to him.



Pretty soon after this a long, cadaverous creature, with lanky locks

hanging down to his shoulders, and a week's stubble bristling from the

hills and valleys of his face, darted within the door, and halted,

motionless, with finger on lip, and head and body bent in listening

attitude.  No sound was heard.



Still he listened.  No sound.  Then he turned the key in the door, and

came elaborately tiptoeing toward me till he was within long reaching

distance of me, when he stopped and, after scanning my face with intense

interest for a while, drew a folded copy of our paper from his bosom, and

said:



"There, you wrote that.  Read it to me--quick!  Relieve me.  I suffer."



I read as follows; and as the sentences fell from my lips I could see the

relief come, I could see the drawn muscles relax, and the anxiety go out

of the face, and rest and peace steal over the features like the merciful

moonlight over a desolate landscape:



     The guano is a fine bird, but great care is necessary in rearing it.

     It should not be imported earlier than June or later than September.

     In the winter it should be kept in a warm place, where it can hatch

     out its young.



     It is evident that we are to have a backward season for grain.

     Therefore it will be well for the farmer to begin setting out his

     corn-stalks and planting his buckwheat cakes in July instead of

     August.



     Concerning the pumpkin.  This berry is a favorite with the natives

     of the interior of New England, who prefer it to the gooseberry for

     the making of fruit-cake, and who likewise give it the preference

     over the raspberry for feeding cows, as being more filling and fully

     as satisfying.  The pumpkin is the only esculent of the orange

     family that will thrive in the North, except the gourd and one or

     two varieties of the squash.  But the custom of planting it in the

     front yard with the shrubbery is fast going out of vogue, for it is

     now generally conceded that, the pumpkin as a shade tree is a

     failure.



     Now, as the warm weather approaches, and the ganders begin to

     spawn--





The excited listener sprang toward me to shake hands, and said:



"There, there--that will do.  I know I am all right now, because you have

read it just as I did, word, for word.  But, stranger, when I first read

it this morning, I said to myself, I never, never believed it before,

notwithstanding my friends kept me under watch so strict, but now I

believe I am crazy; and with that I fetched a howl that you might have

heard two miles, and started out to kill somebody--because, you know,

I knew it would come to that sooner or later, and so I might as well

begin.  I read one of them paragraphs over again, so as to be certain,

and then I burned my house down and started.  I have crippled several

people, and have got one fellow up a tree, where I can get him if I want

him.  But I thought I would call in here as I passed along and make the

thing perfectly certain; and now it is certain, and I tell you it is

lucky for the chap that is in the tree.  I should have killed him sure,

as I went back.  Good-by, sir, good-by; you have taken a great load off

my mind.  My reason has stood the strain of one of your agricultural

articles, and I know that nothing can ever unseat it now.  Good-by, sir."



I felt a little uncomfortable about the cripplings and arsons this person

had been entertaining himself with, for I could not help feeling remotely

accessory to them.  But these thoughts were quickly banished, for the

regular editor walked in!  [I thought to myself, Now if you had gone to

Egypt as I recommended you to, I might have had a chance to get my hand

in; but you wouldn't do it, and here you are.  I sort of expected you.]



The editor was looking sad and perplexed and dejected.



He surveyed the wreck which that old rioter and those two young farmers

had made, and then said "This is a sad business--a very sad business.

There is the mucilage-bottle broken, and six panes of glass, and a

spittoon, and two candlesticks.  But that is not the worst.  The

reputation of the paper is injured--and permanently, I fear.  True, there

never was such a call for the paper before, and it never sold such a

large edition or soared to such celebrity; but does one want to be famous

for lunacy, and prosper upon the infirmities of his mind?  My friend, as

I am an honest man, the street out here is full of people, and others are

roosting on the fences, waiting to get a glimpse of you, because they

think you are crazy.  And well they might after reading your editorials.

They are a disgrace to journalism.  Why, what put it into your head that

you could edit a paper of this nature?  You do not seem to know the first

rudiments of agriculture.  You speak of a furrow and a harrow as being

the same thing; you talk of the moulting season for cows; and you

recommend the domestication of the pole-cat on account of its playfulness

and its excellence as a ratter!  Your remark that clams will lie quiet if

music be played to them was superfluous--entirely superfluous.  Nothing

disturbs clams.  Clams always lie quiet.  Clams care nothing whatever

about music.  Ah, heavens and earth, friend! if you had made the

acquiring of ignorance the study of your life, you could not have

graduated with higher honor than you could to-day.  I never saw anything

like it.  Your observation that the horse-chestnut as an article of

commerce is steadily gaining in favor is simply calculated to destroy

this journal.  I want you to throw up your situation and go.  I want no

more holiday--I could not enjoy it if I had it.  Certainly not with you

in my chair.  I would always stand in dread of what you might be going to

recommend next.  It makes me lose all patience every time I think of your

discussing oyster-beds under the head of 'Landscape Gardening.'  I want

you to go.  Nothing on earth could persuade me to take another holiday.

Oh! why didn't you tell me you didn't know anything about agriculture?"



"Tell you, you corn-stalk, you cabbage, you son of a cauliflower?  It's

the first time I ever heard such an unfeeling remark.  I tell you I have

been in the editorial business going on fourteen years, and it is the

first time I ever heard of a man's having to know anything in order to

edit a newspaper.  You turnip!  Who write the dramatic critiques for the

second-rate papers?  Why, a parcel of promoted shoemakers and apprentice

apothecaries, who know just as much about good acting as I do about good

farming and no more.  Who review the books?  People who never wrote one.

Who do up the heavy leaders on finance?  Parties who have had the largest

opportunities for knowing nothing about it.  Who criticize the Indian

campaigns?  Gentlemen who do not know a war-whoop from a wigwam, and who

never have had to run a foot-race with a tomahawk, or pluck arrows out of

the several members of their families to build the evening camp-fire

with.  Who write the temperance appeals, and clamor about the flowing

bowl?  Folks who will never draw another sober breath till they do it in

the grave.  Who edit the agricultural papers, you--yam?  Men, as a

general thing, who fail in the poetry line, yellow-colored novel line,

sensation, drama line, city-editor line, and finally fall back on

agriculture as a temporary reprieve from the poorhouse.  You try to tell

me anything about the newspaper business!  Sir, I have been through it

from Alpha to Omaha, and I tell you that the less a man knows the bigger

the noise he makes and the higher the salary he commands.  Heaven knows

if I had but been ignorant instead of cultivated, and impudent instead of

diffident, I could have made a name for myself in this cold, selfish

world.  I take my leave, sir.  Since I have been treated as you have

treated me, I am perfectly willing to go.  But I have done my duty.  I

have fulfilled my contract as far as I was permitted to do it.  I said I

could make your paper of interest to all classes--and I have.  I said I

could run your circulation up to twenty thousand copies, and if I had had

two more weeks I'd have done it.  And I'd have given you the best class

of readers that ever an agricultural paper had--not a farmer in it, nor a

solitary individual who could tell a watermelon-tree from a peach-vine to

save his life.  You are the loser by this rupture, not me, Pie-plant.

Adios."



I then left.













THE PETRIFIED MAN



Now, to show how really hard it is to foist a moral or a truth upon an

unsuspecting public through a burlesque without entirely and absurdly

missing one's mark, I will here set down two experiences of my own in

this thing.  In the fall of 1862, in Nevada and California, the people

got to running wild about extraordinary petrifactions and other natural

marvels.  One could scarcely pick up a paper without finding in it one or

two glorified discoveries of this kind.  The mania was becoming a little

ridiculous.  I was a brand-new local editor in Virginia City, and I felt

called upon to destroy this growing evil; we all have our benignant,

fatherly moods at one time or another, I suppose.  I chose to kill the

petrifaction mania with a delicate, a very delicate satire.  But maybe it

was altogether too delicate, for nobody ever perceived the satire part of

it at all.  I put my scheme in the shape of the discovery of a remarkably

petrified man.



I had had a temporary falling out with Mr.----, the new coroner and

justice of the peace of Humboldt, and thought I might as well touch him

up a little at the same time and make him ridiculous, and thus combine

pleasure with business.  So I told, in patient, belief-compelling detail,

all about the finding of a petrified-man at Gravelly Ford (exactly a

hundred and twenty miles, over a breakneck mountain trail from where

---- lived); how all the savants of the immediate neighborhood had been to

examine it (it was notorious that there was not a living creature within

fifty miles of there, except a few starving Indians; some crippled

grasshoppers, and four or five buzzards out of meat and too feeble to get

away); how those savants all pronounced the petrified man to have been in

a state of complete petrifaction for over ten generations; and then, with

a seriousness that I ought to have been ashamed to assume, I stated that

as soon as Mr.----heard the news he summoned a jury, mounted his mule,

and posted off, with noble reverence for official duty, on that awful

five days' journey, through alkali, sage brush, peril of body, and

imminent starvation, to hold an inquest on this man that had been dead

and turned to everlasting stone for more than three hundred years!

And then, my hand being "in," so to speak, I went on, with the same

unflinching gravity, to state that the jury returned a verdict that

deceased came to his death from protracted exposure.  This only moved me

to higher flights of imagination, and I said that the jury, with that

charity so characteristic of pioneers, then dug a grave, and were about

to give the petrified man Christian burial, when they found that for ages

a limestone sediment had been trickling down the face of the stone

against which he was sitting, and this stuff had run under him and

cemented him fast to the "bed-rock"; that the jury (they were all

silver-miners) canvassed the difficulty a moment, and then got out their

powder and fuse, and proceeded to drill a hole under him, in order to

blast him from his position, when Mr.----, "with that delicacy so

characteristic of him, forbade them, observing that it would be little

less than sacrilege to do such a thing."



From beginning to end the "Petrified Man" squib was a string of roaring

absurdities, albeit they were told with an unfair pretense of truth that

even imposed upon me to some extent, and I was in some danger of

believing in my own fraud.  But I really had no desire to deceive

anybody, and no expectation of doing it.  I depended on the way the

petrified man was sitting to explain to the public that he was a swindle.

Yet I purposely mixed that up with other things, hoping to make it

obscure--and I did.  I would describe the position of one foot, and then

say his right thumb was against the side of his nose; then talk about his

other foot, and presently come back and say the fingers of his right hand

were spread apart; then talk about the back of his head a little, and

return and say the left thumb was hooked into the right little finger;

then ramble off about something else, and by and by drift back again and

remark that the fingers of the left hand were spread like those of the

right.  But I was too ingenious.  I mixed it up rather too much; and so

all that description of the attitude, as a key to the humbuggery of the

article, was entirely lost, for nobody but me ever discovered and

comprehended the peculiar and suggestive position of the petrified man's

hands.



As a satire on the petrifaction mania, or anything else, my petrified Man

was a disheartening failure; for everybody received him in innocent good

faith, and I was stunned to see the creature I had begotten to pull down

the wonder-business with, and bring derision upon it, calmly exalted to

the grand chief place in the list of the genuine marvels our Nevada had

produced.  I was so disappointed at the curious miscarriage of my scheme,

that at first I was angry, and did not like to think about it; but by and

by, when the exchanges began to come in with the Petrified Man copied and

guilelessly glorified, I began to feel a soothing secret satisfaction;

and as my gentleman's field of travels broadened, and by the exchanges I

saw that he steadily and implacably penetrated territory after territory,

state after state, and land after land, till he swept the great globe and

culminated in sublime and unimpeached legitimacy in the august London

Lancet, my cup was full, and I said I was glad I had done it.  I think

that for about eleven months, as nearly as I can remember, Mr.----'s

daily mail-bag continued to be swollen by the addition of half a bushel

of newspapers hailing from many climes with the Petrified Man in them,

marked around with a prominent belt of ink.  I sent them to him.  I did

it for spite, not for fun.



He used to shovel them into his back yard and curse.  And every day

during all those months the miners, his constituents (for miners never

quit joking a person when they get started), would call on him and ask if

he could tell them where they could get hold of a paper with the

Petrified Man in it.  He could have accommodated a continent with them.

I hated-----in those days, and these things pacified me and pleased me.

I could not have gotten more real comfort out of him without killing him.













MY BLOODY MASSACRE



The other burlesque I have referred to was my fine satire upon the

financial expedients of "cooking dividends," a thing which became

shamefully frequent on the Pacific coast for a while.  Once more, in my

self-complacent simplicity I felt that the time had arrived for me to

rise up and be a reformer.  I put this reformatory satire, in the shape

of a fearful "Massacre at Empire City."  The San Francisco papers were

making a great outcry about the iniquity of the Daney Silver-Mining

Company, whose directors had declared a "cooked" or false dividend, for

the purpose of increasing the value of their stock, so that they could

sell out at a comfortable figure, and then scramble from under the

tumbling concern.  And while abusing the Daney, those papers did not

forget to urge the public to get rid of all their silver stocks and

invest in, sound and safe San Francisco stocks, such as the Spring Valley

Water Company, etc.  But right at this unfortunate juncture, behold the

Spring Valley cooked a dividend too!  And so, under the insidious mask of

an invented "bloody massacre," I stole upon the public unawares with my

scathing satire upon the dividend cooking system.  In about half a column

of imaginary human carnage I told how a citizen hard murdered his wife

and nine children, and then committed suicide.  And I said slyly, at the

bottom, that the sudden madness of which this melancholy massacre was the

result had been brought about by his having allowed himself to be

persuaded by the California papers to sell his sound and lucrative Nevada

silver stocks, and buy into Spring Valley just in time to get cooked

along with that company's fancy dividend, and sink every cent he had in

the world.



Ah, it was a deep, deep satire, and most ingeniously contrived.  But I

made the horrible details so carefully and conscientiously interesting

that the public devoured them greedily, and wholly overlooked the

following distinctly stated facts, to wit: The murderer was perfectly

well known to every creature in the land as a bachelor, and consequently

he could not murder his wife and nine children; he murdered them "in his

splendid dressed-stone mansion just in the edge of the great pine forest

between Empire City and Dutch Nick's," when even the very pickled oysters

that came on our tables knew that there was not a "dressed-stone mansion"

in all Nevada Territory; also that, so far from there being a "great pine

forest between Empire City and Dutch Nick's," there wasn't a solitary

tree within fifteen miles of either place; and, finally, it was patent

and notorious that Empire City and Dutch Nick's were one and the same

place, and contained only six houses anyhow, and consequently there could

be no forest between them; and on top of all these absurdities I stated

that this diabolical murderer, after inflicting a wound upon himself that

the reader ought to have seen would kill an elephant in the twinkling of

an eye, jumped on his horse and rode four miles, waving his wife's

reeking scalp in the air, and thus performing entered Carson City with

tremendous eclat, and dropped dead in front of the chief saloon, the envy

and admiration of all beholders.



Well, in all my life I never saw anything like the sensation that little

satire created.  It was the talk of the town, it was the talk of the

territory.  Most of the citizens dropped gently into it at breakfast, and

they never finished their meal.  There was something about those minutely

faithful details that was a sufficing substitute for food.  Few people

that were able to read took food that morning.  Dan and I (Dan was my

reportorial associate) took our seats on either side of our customary

table in the "Eagle Restaurant," and, as I unfolded the shred they used

to call a napkin in that establishment, I saw at the next table two

stalwart innocents with that sort of vegetable dandruff sprinkled about

their clothing which was the sign and evidence that they were in from the

Truckee with a load of hay.  The one facing me had the morning paper

folded to a long, narrow strip, and I knew, without any telling, that

that strip represented the column that contained my pleasant financial

satire.  From the way he was excitedly mumbling, I saw that the heedless

son of a hay-mow was skipping with all his might, in order to get to the

bloody details as quickly as possible; and so he was missing the

guide-boards I had set up to warn him that the whole thing was a fraud.

Presently his eyes spread wide open, just as his jaws swung asunder to

take in a potato approaching it on a fork; the potato halted, the face

lit up redly, and the whole man was on fire with excitement.  Then he

broke into a disjointed checking off of the particulars--his potato

cooling in mid-air meantime, and his mouth making a reach for it

occasionally; but always bringing up suddenly against a new and still

more direful performance of my hero.  At last he looked his stunned and

rigid comrade impressively in the face, and said, with an expression of

concentrated awe:



"Jim, he b'iled his baby, and he took the old 'oman's skelp.  Cuss'd if I

want any breakfast!"



And he laid his lingering potato reverently down, and he and his friend

departed from the restaurant empty but satisfied.



He never got down to where the satire part of it began.  Nobody ever did.

They found the thrilling particulars sufficient.  To drop in with a poor

little moral at the fag-end of such a gorgeous massacre was like

following the expiring sun with a candle and hope to attract the world's

attention to it.



The idea that anybody could ever take my massacre for a genuine

occurrence never once suggested itself to me, hedged about as it was by

all those telltale absurdities and impossibilities concerning the "great

pine forest," the "dressed-stone mansion," etc.  But I found out then,

and never have forgotten since, that we never read the dull explanatory

surroundings of marvelously exciting things when we have no occasion to

suppose that some irresponsible scribbler is trying to defraud us; we

skip all that, and hasten to revel in the blood-curdling particulars and

be happy.















THE UNDERTAKER'S CHAT



"Now that corpse," said the undertaker, patting the folded hands of

deceased approvingly, was a brick-every way you took him he was a brick.

He was so real accommodating, and so modest-like and simple in his last

moments.  Friends wanted metallic burial-case--nothing else would do.

I couldn't get it.  There warn't going to be time--anybody could see

that.



"Corpse said never mind, shake him up some kind of a box he could stretch

out in comfortable, he warn't particular 'bout the general style of it.

Said he went more on room than style, anyway in a last final container.



"Friends wanted a silver door-plate on the coffin, signifying who he was

and wher' he was from.  Now you know a fellow couldn't roust out such a

gaily thing as that in a little country-town like this.  What did corpse

say?



"Corpse said, whitewash his old canoe and dob his address and general

destination onto it with a blacking-brush and a stencil-plate, 'long with

a verse from some likely hymn or other, and pint him for the tomb, and

mark him C. O. D., and just let him flicker.  He warn't distressed any

more than you be--on the contrary, just as ca,'m and collected as a

hearse-horse; said he judged that wher' he was going to a body would find

it considerable better to attract attention by a picturesque moral

character than a natty burial-case with a swell door-plate on it.



"Splendid man, he was.  I'd druther do for a corpse like that 'n any I've

tackled in seven year.  There's some satisfaction in buryin' a man like

that.  You feel that what you're doing is appreciated.  Lord bless you,

so's he got planted before he sp'iled, he was perfectly satisfied; said

his relations meant well, perfectly well, but all them preparations was

bound to delay the thing more or less, and he didn't wish to be kept

layin' around.  You never see such a clear head as what he had--and so

ca,'m and so cool.  Jist a hunk of brains--that is what he was.

Perfectly awful.  It was a ripping distance from one end of that man's

head to t'other.  Often and over again he's had brain-fever a-raging in

one place, and the rest of the pile didn't know anything about it--didn't

affect it any more than an Injun Insurrection in Arizona affects the

Atlantic States.



"Well, the relations they wanted a big funeral, but corpse said he was

down on flummery--didn,'t want any procession--fill the hearse full of

mourners, and get out a stern line and tow him behind. He was the most

down on style of any remains I ever struck.  A beautiful, simpleminded

creature it was what he was, you can depend on that.  He was just set on

having things the way he wanted them, and he took a solid comfort in

laying his little plans.  He had me measure him and take a whole raft of

directions; then he had the minister stand up behind along box with a

table--cloth over it, to represent the coffin, and read his funeral

sermon, saying 'Angcore, angcore!' at the good places, and making him

scratch out every bit of brag about him, and all the hifalutin; and then

he made them trot out the choir, so's he could help them pick out the

tunes for the occasion, and he got them to sing 'Pop Goes the Weasel,'

because he'd always liked that tune when he was downhearted, and solemn

music made him sad; and when they sung that with tears in their eyes

(because they all loved him), and his relations grieving around, he just

laid there as happy as a bug, and trying to beat time and showing all

over how much he enjoyed it; and presently he got worked up and excited,

and tried to join in, for, mind you, he was pretty proud of his abilities

in the singing line; but the first time he opened his mouth and was just

going to spread himself his breath took a walk.



"I never see a man snuffed out so sudden.  Ah, it was a great loss--a,

powerful loss to this poor little one-horse town.  Well, well, well, I

hain't got time to be palavering along here--got to nail on the lid and

mosey along with him; and if you'll just give me a lift we'll skeet him

into the hearse and meander along.  Relations bound to have it so--don't

pay no attention to dying injunctions, minute a corpse's gone; but, if I

had my way, if I didn't respect his last wishes and tow him behind the

hearse I'll be cuss'd.  I consider that whatever a corpse wants done for

his comfort is little enough matter, and a man hain't got no right to

deceive him or take advantage of him; and whatever a corpse trusts me to

do I'm a-going to do, you know, even if it's to stuff him and paint him

yaller and keep him for a keepsake--you hear me!"



He cracked his whip and went lumbering away with his ancient ruin of a

hearse, and I continued my walk with a valuable lesson learned--that a

healthy and wholesome cheerfulness is not necessarily impossible to any

occupation.  The lesson is likely to be lasting, for it will take many

months to obliterate the memory of the remarks and circumstances that

impressed it.













CONCERNING CHAMBERMAIDS



Against all chambermaids, of whatsoever age or nationality, I launch the

curse of bachelordom!  Because:



They always put the pillows at the opposite end of the bed from the

gas-burner, so that while you read and smoke before sleeping (as is the

ancient and honored custom of bachelors), you have to hold your book

aloft, in an uncomfortable position, to keep the light from dazzling your

eyes.



When they find the pillows removed to the other end of the bed in the

morning, they receive not the suggestion in a friendly spirit; but,

glorying in their absolute sovereignty, and unpitying your helplessness,

they make the bed just as it was originally, and gloat in secret over the

pang their tyranny will cause you.



Always after that, when they find you have transposed the pillows, they

undo your work, and thus defy and seek to embitter the life that God has

given you.



If they cannot get the light in an inconvenient position any other way,

they move the bed.



If you pull your trunk out six inches from the wall, so that the lid will

stay up when you open it, they always shove that trunk back again.  They

do it on purpose.



If you want the spittoon in a certain spot, where it will be handy, they

don't, and so they move it.



They always put your other boots into inaccessible places.  They chiefly

enjoy depositing them as far under the bed as the wall will permit.  It

is because this compels you to get down in an undignified attitude and

make wild sweeps for them in the dark with the bootjack, and swear.



They always put the matchbox in some other place.  They hunt up a new

place for it every day, and put up a bottle, or other perishable glass

thing, where the box stood before.  This is to cause you to break that

glass thing, groping in the dark, and get yourself into trouble.



They are for ever and ever moving the furniture.  When you come in in the

night you can calculate on finding the bureau where the wardrobe was in

the morning.  And when you go out in the morning, if you leave the

slop-bucket by the door and rocking-chair by the window, when you come in

at midnight or thereabout, you will fall over that rocking-chair, and you

will proceed toward the window and sit down in that slop-tub.  This will

disgust you.  They like that.



No matter where you put anything, they are not going to let it stay

there.  They will take it and move it the first chance they get.  It is

their nature.  And, besides, it gives them pleasure to be mean and

contrary this way.  They would die if they couldn't be villains.



They always save up all the old scraps of printed rubbish you throw on

the floor, and stack them up carefully on the table, and start the fire

with your valuable manuscripts.  If there is any one particular old scrap

that you are more down on than any other, and which you are gradually

wearing your life out trying to get rid of, you may take all the pains

you possibly can in that direction, but it won't be of any use, because

they will always fetch that old scrap back and put it in the same old

place again every time.  It does them good.



And they use up more hair-oil than any six men.  If charged with

purloining the same, they lie about it.  What do they care about a

hereafter?  Absolutely nothing.



If you leave the key in the door for convenience' sake, they will carry

it down to the office and give it to the clerk.  They do this under the

vile pretense of trying to protect your property from thieves; but

actually they do it because they want to make you tramp back down-stairs

after it when you come home tired, or put you to the trouble of sending a

waiter for it, which waiter will expect you to pay him something.  In

which case I suppose the degraded creatures divide.



They keep always trying to make your bed before you get up, thus

destroying your rest and inflicting agony upon you; but after you get up,

they don't come any more till next day.



They do all the mean things they can think of, and they do them just out

of pure cussedness, and nothing else.



Chambermaids are dead to every human instinct.



If I can get a bill through the legislature abolishing chambermaids, I

mean to do it.













AURELIA'S UNFORTUNATE YOUNG MAN--[Written about 1865.]



The facts in the following case came to me by letter from a young lady

who lives in the beautiful city of San Jose; she is perfectly unknown to

me, and simply signs herself "Aurelia Maria," which may possibly be a

fictitious name.  But no matter, the poor girl is almost heartbroken by

the misfortunes she has undergone, and so confused by the conflicting

counsels of misguided friends and insidious enemies that she does not

know what course to pursue in order to extricate herself from the web of

difficulties in which she seems almost hopelessly involved.  In this

dilemma she turns to me for help, and supplicates for my guidance and

instruction with a moving eloquence that would touch the heart of a

statue.  Hear her sad story:



She says that when she was sixteen years old she met and loved, with all

the devotion of a passionate nature, a young man from New Jersey, named

Williamson Breckinridge Caruthers, who was some six years her senior.

They were engaged, with the free consent of their friends and relatives,

and for a time it seemed as if their career was destined to, be

characterized by an immunity from sorrow beyond the usual lot of

humanity.  But at last the tide of fortune turned; young Caruthers became

infect with smallpox of the most virulent type, and when he recovered

from his illness his face was pitted like a waffle-mold, and his

comeliness gone forever.  Aurelia thought to break off the engagement at

first, but pity for her unfortunate lover caused her to postpone the

marriage-day for a season, and give him another trial.



The very day before the wedding was to have taken place, Breckinridge,

while absorbed in watching the flight of a balloon, walked into a well

and fractured one of his legs, and it had to be taken off above the knee.

Again Aurelia was moved to break the engagement, but again love

triumphed, and she set the day forward and gave him another chance to

reform.



And again misfortune overtook the unhappy youth.  He lost one arm by the

premature discharge of a Fourth of July cannon, and within three months

he got the other pulled out by a carding-machine.  Aurelia's heart was

almost crushed by these latter calamities.  She could not but be deeply

grieved to see her lover passing from her by piecemeal, feeling, as she

did, that he could not last forever under this disastrous process of

reduction, yet knowing of no way to stop its dreadful career, and in her

tearful despair she almost regretted, like brokers who hold on and lose,

that she had not taken him at first, before he had suffered such an

alarming depreciation.  Still, her brave soul bore her up, and she

resolved to bear with her friend's unnatural disposition yet a little

longer.



Again the wedding-day approached, and again disappointment overshadowed

it; Caruthers fell ill with the erysipelas, and lost the use of one of

his eyes entirely.  The friends and relatives of the bride, considering

that she had already put up with more than could reasonably be expected

of her, now came forward and insisted that the match should be broken

off; but after wavering awhile, Aurelia, with a generous spirit which did

her credit, said she had reflected calmly upon the matter, and could not

discover that Breckinridge was to blame.



So she extended the time once more, and he broke his other leg.



It was a sad day for the poor girl when, she saw the surgeons reverently

bearing away the sack whose uses she had learned by previous experience,

and her heart told her the bitter truth that some more of her lover was

gone.  She felt that the field of her affections was growing more and

more circumscribed every day, but once more she frowned down her

relatives and renewed her betrothal.



Shortly before the time set for the nuptials another disaster occurred.

There was but one man scalped by the Owens River Indians last year.  That

man was Williamson Breckinridge Caruthers of New Jersey.  He was hurrying

home with happiness in his heart, when he lost his hair forever, and in

that hour of bitterness he almost cursed the mistaken mercy that had

spared his head.



At last Aurelia is in serious perplexity as to what she ought to do.  She

still loves her Breckinridge, she writes, with truly womanly feeling--she

still loves what is left of him but her parents are bitterly opposed to

the match, because he has no property and is disabled from working, and

she has not sufficient means to support both comfortably.  "Now, what

should she do?" she asked with painful and anxious solicitude.



It is a delicate question; it is one which involves the lifelong

happiness of a woman, and that of nearly two-thirds of a man, and I feel

that it would be assuming too great a responsibility to do more than make

a mere suggestion in the case.  How would it do to build to him?  If

Aurelia can afford the expense, let her furnish her mutilated lover with

wooden arms and wooden legs, and a glass eye and a wig, and give him

another show; give him ninety days, without grace, and if he does not

break his neck in the mean time, marry him and take the chances.  It does

not seem to me that there is much risk, anyway, Aurelia, because if he

sticks to his singular propensity for damaging himself every time he sees

a good opportunity, his next experiment is bound to finish him, and then

you are safe, married or single.  If married, the wooden legs and such

other valuables as he may possess revert to the widow, and you see you

sustain no actual loss save the cherished fragment of a noble but most

unfortunate husband, who honestly strove to do right, but whose

extraordinary instincts were against him.  Try it, Maria. I have thought

the matter over carefully and well, and it is the only chance I see for

you.  It would have been a happy conceit on the part of Caruthers if he

had started with his neck and broken that first; but since he has seen

fit to choose a different policy and string himself out as long as

possible, I do not think we ought to upbraid him for it if he has enjoyed

it.  We must do the best we can under the circumstances, and try not to

feel exasperated at him.













"AFTER" JENKINS



A grand affair of a ball--the Pioneers'--came off at the Occidental some

time ago.  The following notes of the costumes worn by the belles of the

occasion may not be uninteresting to the general reader, and Jerkins may

get an idea therefrom:



Mrs. W. M. was attired in an elegant 'pate de foie gras,' made expressly

for her, and was greatly admired.  Miss S. had her hair done up.  She was

the center of attraction for the envy of all the ladies.  Mrs. G. W. was

tastefully dressed in a 'tout ensemble,' and was greeted with deafening

applause wherever she went.  Mrs. C. N. was superbly arrayed in white kid

gloves.  Her modest and engaging manner accorded well with the

unpretending simplicity of her costume and caused her to be regarded with

absorbing interest by every one.



The charming Miss M. M. B. appeared in a thrilling waterfall, whose

exceeding grace and volume compelled the homage of pioneers and emigrants

alike.  How beautiful she was!



The queenly Mrs. L. R.  was attractively attired in her new and beautiful

false teeth, and the 'bon jour' effect they naturally produced was

heightened by her enchanting and well-sustained smile.



Miss R. P., with that repugnance to ostentation in dress which is so

peculiar to her, was attired in a simple white lace collar, fastened with

a neat pearl-button solitaire.  The fine contrast between the sparkling

vivacity of her natural optic, and the steadfast attentiveness of her

placid glass eye, was the subject of general and enthusiastic remark.



Miss C. L. B.  had her fine nose elegantly enameled, and the easy grace

with which she blew it from time to time marked her as a cultivated and

accomplished woman of the world; its exquisitely modulated tone excited

the admiration of all who had the happiness to hear it.













ABOUT BARBERS



All things change except barbers, the ways of barbers, and the

surroundings of barbers.  These never change.  What one experiences in a

barber's shop the first time he enters one is what he always experiences

in barbers' shops afterward till the end of his days.  I got shaved this

morning as usual.  A man approached the door from Jones Street as I

approached it from Main--a thing that always happens.  I hurried up, but

it was of no use; he entered the door one little step ahead of me, and I

followed in on his heels and saw him take the only vacant chair, the one

presided over by the best barber.  It always happens so.  I sat down,

hoping that I might fall heir to the chair belonging to the better of the

remaining two barbers, for he had already begun combing his man's hair,

while his comrade was not yet quite done rubbing up and oiling his

customer's locks.  I watched the probabilities with strong interest.

When I saw that No. 2 was gaining on No. 1 my interest grew to

solicitude.  When No. 1 stopped a moment to make change on a bath ticket

for a new-comer, and lost ground in the race, my solicitude rose to

anxiety.  When No. 1 caught up again, and both he and his comrade were

pulling the towels away and brushing the powder from their customers'

cheeks, and it was about an even thing which one would say "Next!" first,

my very breath stood still with the suspense.  But when at the

culminating moment No. 1 stopped to pass a comb a couple of times through

his customer's eyebrows, I saw that he had lost the race by a single

instant, and I rose indignant and quitted the shop, to keep from falling

into the hands of No. 2; for I have none of that enviable firmness that

enables a man to look calmly into the eyes of a waiting barber and tell

him he will wait for his fellow-barber's chair.



I stayed out fifteen minutes, and then went back, hoping for better luck.

Of course all the chairs were occupied now, and four men sat waiting,

silent, unsociable, distraught, and looking bored, as men always do who

are waiting their turn in a barber's shop.  I sat down in one of the

iron-armed compartments of an old sofa, and put in the time far a while

reading the framed advertisements of all sorts of quack nostrums for

dyeing and coloring the hair.  Then I read the greasy names on the

private bayrum bottles; read the names and noted the numbers on the

private shaving-cups in the pigeonholes; studied the stained and damaged

cheap prints on the walls, of battles, early Presidents, and voluptuous

recumbent sultanas, and the tiresome and everlasting young girl putting

her grandfather's spectacles on; execrated in my heart the cheerful

canary and the distracting parrot that few barbers' shops are without.

Finally, I searched out the least dilapidated of last year's illustrated

papers that littered the foul center-table, and conned their

unjustifiable misrepresentations of old forgotten events.



At last my turn came.  A voice said "Next!" and I surrendered to--No.  2,

of course.  It always happens so.  I said meekly that I was in a hurry,

and it affected him as strongly as if he had never heard it.  He shoved

up my head, and put a napkin under it.  He plowed his fingers into my

collar and fixed a towel there.  He explored my hair with his claws and

suggested that it needed trimming.  I said I did not want it trimmed.  He

explored again and said it was pretty long for the present style--better

have a little taken off; it needed it behind especially.  I said I had

had it cut only a week before.  He yearned over it reflectively a moment,

and then asked with a disparaging manner, who cut it?  I came back at him

promptly with a "You did!" I had him there.  Then he fell to stirring up

his lather and regarding himself in the glass, stopping now and then to

get close and examine his chin critically or inspect a pimple.  Then he

lathered one side of my face thoroughly, and was about to lather the

other, when a dog-fight attracted his attention, and he ran to the window

and stayed and saw it out, losing two shillings on the result in bets

with the other barbers, a thing which gave me great satisfaction.  He

finished lathering, and then began to rub in the suds with his hand.



He now began to sharpen his razor on an old suspender, and was delayed a

good deal on account of a controversy about a cheap masquerade ball he

had figured at the night before, in red cambric and bogus ermine, as some

kind of a king.  He was so gratified with being chaffed about some damsel

whom he had smitten with his charms that he used every means to continue

the controversy by pretending to be annoyed at the chaffings of his

fellows.  This matter begot more surveyings of himself in the glass, and

he put down his razor and brushed his hair with elaborate care,

plastering an inverted arch of it down on his forehead, accomplishing an

accurate "Part" behind, and brushing the two wings forward over his ears

with nice exactness.  In the mean time the lather was drying on my face,

and apparently eating into my vitals.



Now he began to shave, digging his fingers into my countenance to stretch

the skin and bundling and tumbling my head this way and that as

convenience in shaving demanded.  As long as he was on the tough sides of

my face I did not suffer; but when he began to rake, and rip, and tug at

my chin, the tears came.  He now made a handle of my nose, to assist him

shaving the corners of my upper lip, and it was by this bit of

circumstantial evidence that I discovered that a part of his duties in

the shop was to clean the kerosene-lamps.  I had often wondered in an

indolent way whether the barbers did that, or whether it was the boss.



About this time I was amusing myself trying to guess where he would be

most likely to cut me this time, but he got ahead of me, and sliced me on

the end of the chin before I had got my mind made up.  He immediately

sharpened his razor--he might have done it before.  I do not like a close

shave, and would not let him go over me a second time.  I tried to get

him to put up his razor, dreading that he would make for the side of my

chin, my pet tender spot, a place which a razor cannot touch twice

without making trouble; but he said he only wanted to just smooth off one

little roughness, and in the same moment he slipped his razor along the

forbidden ground, and the dreaded pimple-signs of a close shave rose up

smarting and answered to the call.  Now he soaked his towel in bay rum,

and slapped it all over my face nastily; slapped it over as if a human

being ever yet washed his face in that way.  Then he dried it by slapping

with the dry part of the towel, as if a human being ever dried his face

in such a fashion; but a barber seldom rubs you like a Christian.  Next

he poked bay ruin into the cut place with his towel, then choked the

wound with powdered starch, then soaked it with bay rum again, and would

have gone on soaking and powdering it forevermore, no doubt, if I had not

rebelled and begged off.  He powdered my whole face now, straightened me

up, and began to plow my hair thoughtfully with his hands.  Then he

suggested a shampoo, and said my hair needed it badly, very badly.

I observed that I shampooed it myself very thoroughly in the bath

yesterday.  I "had him" again.  He next recommended some of "Smith's Hair

Glorifier," and offered to sell me a bottle.  I declined.  He praised the

new perfume, "Jones's Delight of the Toilet," and proposed to sell me

some of that.  I declined again.  He tendered me a tooth-wash atrocity of

his own invention, and when I declined offered to trade knives with me.



He returned to business after the miscarriage of this last enterprise,

sprinkled me all over, legs and all, greased my hair in defiance of my

protest against it, rubbed and scrubbed a good deal of it out by the

roots, and combed and brushed the rest, parting it behind, and plastering

the eternal inverted arch of hair down on my forehead, and then, while

combing my scant eyebrows and defiling them with pomade, strung out an

account of the achievements of a six-ounce black-and-tan terrier of his

till I heard the whistles blow for noon, and knew I was five minutes too

late for the train.  Then he snatched away the towel, brushed it lightly

about my face, passed his comb through my eyebrows once more, and gaily

sang out "Next!"



This barber fell down and died of apoplexy two hours later.  I am waiting

over a day for my revenge--I am going to attend his funeral.













"PARTY CRIES" IN IRELAND



Belfast is a peculiarly religious community.  This may be said of the

whole of the North of Ireland.  About one-half of the people are

Protestants and the other half Catholics.  Each party does all it can to

make its own doctrines popular and draw the affections of the irreligious

toward them.  One hears constantly of the most touching instances of this

zeal.  A week ago a vast concourse of Catholics assembled at Armagh to

dedicate a new Cathedral; and when they started home again the roadways

were lined with groups of meek and lowly Protestants who stoned them till

all the region round about was marked with blood.  I thought that only

Catholics argued in that way, but it seems to be a mistake.



Every man in the community is a missionary and carries a brick to

admonish the erring with.  The law has tried to break this up, but not

with perfect success.  It has decreed that irritating "party cries" shall

not be indulged in, and that persons uttering them shall be fined forty

shillings and costs.  And so, in the police court reports every day, one

sees these fines recorded.  Last week a girl of twelve years old was

fined the usual forty shillings and costs for proclaiming in the public

streets that she was "a Protestant."  The usual cry is, "To hell with the

Pope!" or "To hell with the Protestants!" according to the utterer's

system of salvation.



One of Belfast's local jokes was very good.  It referred to the uniform

and inevitable fine of forty shillings and costs for uttering a party

cry--and it is no economical fine for a poor man, either, by the way.

They say that a policeman found a drunken man lying on the ground, up a

dark alley, entertaining himself with shouting, "To hell with!"  "To hell

with!"  The officer smelt a fine--informers get half.



"What's that you say?"



"To hell with!"



"To hell with who?  To hell with what?"



"Ah, bedad, ye can finish it yourself--it's too expansive for me!"



I think the seditious disposition, restrained by the economical instinct,

is finely put in that.













THE FACTS CONCERNING THE RECENT RESIGNATION



WASHINGTON, December, 1867.



I have resigned.  The government appears to go on much the same, but

there is a spoke out of its wheel, nevertheless.  I was clerk of the

Senate Committee on Conchology, and I have thrown up the position.

I could see the plainest disposition on the part of the other members of

the government to debar me from having any voice in the counsels of the

nation, and so I could no longer hold office and retain my self-respect.

If I were to detail all the outrages that were heaped upon me during the

six days that I was connected with the government in an official

capacity, the narrative would fill a volume.  They appointed me clerk of

that Committee on Conchology and then allowed me no amanuensis to play

billiards with.  I would have borne that, lonesome as it was, if I had

met with that courtesy from the other members of the Cabinet which was my

due.  But I did not.  Whenever I observed that the head of a department

was pursuing a wrong course, I laid down everything and went and tried to

set him right, as it was my duty to do; and I never was thanked for it in

a single instance.  I went, with the best intentions in the world, to the

Secretary of the Navy, and said:



"Sir, I cannot see that Admiral Farragut is doing anything but

skirmishing around there in Europe, having a sort of picnic.  Now, that

may be all very well, but it does not exhibit itself to me in that light.

If there is no fighting for him to do, let him come home.  There is no

use in a man having a whole fleet for a pleasure excursion.  It is too

expensive.  Mind, I do not object to pleasure excursions for the naval

officers--pleasure excursions that are in reason--pleasure excursions

that are economical.  Now, they might go down the Mississippi

on a raft--"



You ought to have heard him storm!  One would have supposed I had

committed a crime of some kind.  But I didn't mind.  I said it was cheap,

and full of republican simplicity, and perfectly safe.  I said that, for

a tranquil pleasure excursion, there was nothing equal to a raft.



Then the Secretary of the Navy asked me who I was; and when I told him I

was connected with the government, he wanted to know in what capacity.  I

said that, without remarking upon the singularity of such a question,

coming, as it did, from a member of that same government, I would inform

him that I was clerk of the Senate Committee on Conchology.  Then there

was a fine storm!  He finished by ordering me to leave the premises, and

give my attention strictly to my own business in future.  My first

impulse was to get him removed.  However, that would harm others besides

himself, and do me no real good, and so I let him stay.



I went next to the Secretary of War, who was not inclined to see me at

all until he learned that I was connected with the government.  If I had

not been on important business, I suppose I could not have got in.

I asked him for alight (he was smoking at the time), and then I told him

I had no fault to find with his defending the parole stipulations of

General Lee and his comrades in arms, but that I could not approve of his

method of fighting the Indians on the Plains.  I said he fought too

scattering.  He ought to get the Indians more together--get them together

in some convenient place, where he could have provisions enough for both

parties, and then have a general massacre.  I said there was nothing so

convincing to an Indian as a general massacre.  If he could not approve

of the massacre, I said the next surest thing for an Indian was soap and

education.  Soap and education are not as sudden as a massacre, but they

are more deadly in the long run; because a half-massacred Indian may

recover, but if you educate him and wash him, it is bound to finish him

some time or other.  It undermines his constitution; it strikes at the

foundation of his being.  "Sir," I said, "the time has come when

blood-curdling cruelty has become necessary.  Inflict soap and a

spelling-book on every Indian that ravages the Plains, and let them die!"



The Secretary of War asked me if I was a member of the Cabinet, and I

said I was.  He inquired what position I held, and I said I was clerk of

the Senate Committee on Conchology.  I was then ordered under arrest for

contempt of court, and restrained of my liberty for the best part of the

day.



I almost resolved to be silent thenceforward, and let the Government get

along the best way it could.  But duty called, and I obeyed.  I called on

the Secretary of the Treasury.  He said:



"What will you have?"



The question threw me off my guard.  I said, "Rum punch."



He said: "If you have got any business here, sir, state it--and in as few

words as possible."



I then said that I was sorry he had seen fit to change the subject so

abruptly, because such conduct was very offensive to me; but under the

circumstances I would overlook the matter and come to the point.  I now

went into an earnest expostulation with him upon the extravagant length

of his report.  I said it was expensive, unnecessary, and awkwardly

constructed; there were no descriptive passages in it, no poetry, no

sentiment no heroes, no plot, no pictures--not even wood-cuts.  Nobody

would read it, that was a clear case.  I urged him not to ruin his

reputation by getting out a thing like that.  If he ever hoped to succeed

in literature he must throw more variety into his writings.  He must

beware of dry detail.  I said that the main popularity of the almanac was

derived from its poetry and conundrums, and that a few conundrums

distributed around through his Treasury report would help the sale of it

more than all the internal revenue he could put into it.  I said these

things in the kindest spirit, and yet the Secretary of the Treasury fell

into a violent passion.  He even said I was an ass.  He abused me in the

most vindictive manner, and said that if I came there again meddling with

his business he would throw me out of the window.  I said I would take my

hat and go, if I could not be treated with the respect due to my office,

and I did go.  It was just like a new author.  They always think they

know more than anybody else when they are getting out their first book.

Nobody can tell them anything.



During the whole time that I was connected with the government it seemed

as if I could not do anything in an official capacity without getting

myself into trouble.  And yet I did nothing, attempted nothing, but what

I conceived to be for the good of my country.  The sting of my wrongs may

have driven me to unjust and harmful conclusions, but it surely seemed to

me that the Secretary of State, the Secretary of War, the Secretary of

the Treasury, and others of my confreres had conspired from the very

beginning to drive me from the Administration.  I never attended but one

Cabinet meeting while I was connected with the government.  That was

sufficient for me.  The servant at the White House door did not seem

disposed to make way for me until I asked if the other members of the

Cabinet had arrived.  He said they had, and I entered.  They were all

there; but nobody offered me a seat.  They stared at me as if I had been

an intruder.  The President said:



"Well, sir, who are you?"



I handed him my card, and he read: "The HON.  MARK TWAIN, Clerk of the

Senate Committee on Conchology."  Then he looked at me from head to foot,

as if he had never heard of me before.  The Secretary of the Treasury

said:



"This is the meddlesome ass that came to recommend me to put poetry and

conundrums in my report, as if it were an almanac."



The Secretary of War said: "It is the same visionary that came to me

yesterday with a scheme to educate a portion of the Indians to death,

and massacre the balance."



The Secretary of the Navy said: "I recognize this youth as the person who

has been interfering with my business time and again during the week.  He

is distressed about Admiral Farragut's using a whole fleet for a pleasure

excursion, as he terms it.  His proposition about some insane pleasure

excursion on a raft is too absurd to repeat."



I said: "Gentlemen, I perceive here a disposition to throw discredit

upon every act of my official career; I perceive, also, a disposition to

debar me from all voice in the counsels of the nation.  No notice

whatever was sent to me to-day.  It was only by the merest chance that I

learned that there was going to be a Cabinet meeting.  But let these

things pass.  All I wish to know is, is this a Cabinet meeting or is it

not?"



The President said it was.



"Then," I said, "let us proceed to business at once, and not fritter away

valuable time in unbecoming fault-findings with each other's official

conduct."



The Secretary of State now spoke up, in his benignant way, and said,

"Young man, you are laboring under a mistake.  The clerks of the

Congressional committees are not members of the Cabinet.  Neither are the

doorkeepers of the Capitol, strange as it may seem.  Therefore, much as

we could desire your more than human wisdom in our deliberations, we

cannot lawfully avail ourselves of it.  The counsels of the nation must

proceed without you; if disaster follows, as follow full well it may, be

it balm to your sorrowing spirit that by deed and voice you did what in

you lay to avert it.  You have my blessing.  Farewell."



These gentle words soothed my troubled breast, and I went away.  But the

servants of a nation can know no peace.  I had hardly reached my den in

the Capitol, and disposed my feet on the table like a representative,

when one of the Senators on the Conchological Committee came in in a

passion and said:



"Where have you been all day?"



I observed that, if that was anybody's affair but my own, I had been to a

Cabinet meeting.



"To a Cabinet meeting?  I would like to know what business you had at a

Cabinet meeting?"



I said I went there to consult--allowing for the sake of argument that he

was in any wise concerned in the matter.  He grew insolent then, and

ended by saying he had wanted me for three days past to copy a report on

bomb-shells, egg-shells, clamshells, and I don't know what all, connected

with conchology, and nobody had been able to find me.



This was too much.  This was the feather that broke the clerical camel's

back.  I said, "Sir, do you suppose that I am going to work for six

dollars a day?  If that is the idea, let me recommend the Senate

Committee on Conchology to hire somebody else.  I am the slave of no

faction!  Take back your degrading commission.  Give me liberty, or give

me death!"



From that hour I was no longer connected with the government.  Snubbed by

the department, snubbed by the Cabinet, snubbed at last by the chairman

of a committee I was endeavoring to adorn, I yielded to persecution, cast

far from me the perils and seductions of my great office, and forsook my

bleeding country in the hour of her peril.



But I had done the state some service, and I sent in my bill:



     The United States of America in account with

     the Hon. Clerk of the Senate Committee on Conchology,   Dr.

          To consultation with Secretary of War ............ $50

          To consultation with Secretary of Navy ........... $50

          To consultation with Secretary of the Treasury ... $50

          Cabinet consultation ...................No charge.

          To mileage to and from Jerusalem, via Egypt,

               Algiers, Gibraltar, and Cadiz,

               14,000 miles, at 20c. a mile ............. $2,800

          To salary as Clerk of Senate Committee

          on Conchology, six days, at $6 per day ........... $36



                         Total .......................... $2,986



--[Territorial delegates charge mileage both ways, although they never go

back when they get here once.  Why my mileage is denied me is more than I

can understand.]



Not an item of this bill has been paid, except that trifle of thirty-six

dollars for clerkship salary.  The Secretary of the Treasury, pursuing me

to the last, drew his pen through all the other items, and simply marked

in the margin "Not allowed."  So, the dread alternative is embraced at

last.  Repudiation has begun!  The nation is lost.



I am done with official life for the present.  Let those clerks who are

willing to be imposed on remain.  I know numbers of them in the

departments who are never informed when there is to be a Cabinet meeting,

whose advice is never asked about war, or finance, or commerce, by the

heads of the nation, any more than if they were not connected with the

government, and who actually stay in their offices day after day and

work!  They know their importance to the nation, and they unconsciously

show it in their bearing, and the way they order their sustenance at the

restaurant--but they work.  I know one who has to paste all sorts of

little scraps from the newspapers into a scrapbook--sometimes as many as

eight or ten scraps a day.  He doesn't do it well, but he does it as well

as he can.  It is very fatiguing.  It is exhausting to the intellect.

Yet he only gets eighteen hundred dollars a year.  With a brain like his,

that young man could amass thousands and thousands of dollars in some

other pursuit, if he chose to do it.  But no--his heart is with his

country, and he will serve her as long as she has got a scrapbook left.

And I know clerks that don't know how to write very well, but such

knowledge as they possess they nobly lay at the feet of their country,

and toil on and suffer for twenty-five hundred dollars a year.  What they

write has to be written over again by other clerks sometimes; but when a

man has done his best for his country, should his country complain?  Then

there are clerks that have no clerkships, and are waiting, and waiting,

and waiting for a vacancy--waiting patiently for a chance to help their

country out--and while they, are waiting, they only get barely two

thousand dollars a year for it.  It is sad it is very, very sad.  When a

member of Congress has a friend who is gifted, but has no employment

wherein his great powers may be brought to bear, he confers him upon his

country, and gives him a clerkship in a department.  And there that man

has to slave his life out, fighting documents for the benefit of a nation

that never thinks of him, never sympathizes with him--and all for two

thousand or three thousand dollars a year.  When I shall have completed

my list of all the clerks in the several departments, with my statement

of what they have to do, and what they get for it, you will see that

there are not half enough clerks, and that what there are do not get half

enough pay.













HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF



The following I find in a Sandwich Island paper which some friend has

sent me from that tranquil far-off retreat.  The coincidence between my

own experience and that here set down by the late Mr. Benton is so

remarkable that I cannot forbear publishing and commenting upon the

paragraph.  The Sandwich Island paper says:



How touching is this tribute of the late Hon. T. H. Benton to his

mother's influence:--'My mother asked me never to use tobacco; I have

never touched it from that time to the present day.  She asked me not to

gamble, and I have never gambled.  I cannot tell who is losing in games

that are being played.  She admonished me, too, against liquor-drinking,

and whatever capacity for endurance I have at present, and whatever

usefulness I may have attained through life, I attribute to having

complied with her pious and correct wishes.  When I was seven years of

age she asked me not to drink, and then I made a resolution of total

abstinence; and that I have adhered to it through all time I owe to my

mother.'



I never saw anything so curious.  It is almost an exact epitome of my own

moral career--after simply substituting a grandmother for a mother.  How

well I remember my grandmother's asking me not to use tobacco, good old

soul!  She said, "You're at it again, are you, you whelp?  Now don't ever

let me catch you chewing tobacco before breakfast again, or I lay I'll

blacksnake you within an inch of your life!"  I have never touched it at

that hour of the morning from that time to the present day.



She asked me not to gamble.  She whispered and said, "Put up those wicked

cards this minute!--two pair and a jack, you numskull, and the other

fellow's got a flush!"



I never have gambled from that day to this--never once--without a "cold

deck" in my pocket.  I cannot even tell who is going to lose in games

that are being played unless I deal myself.



When I was two years of age she asked me not to drink, and then I made a

resolution of total abstinence.  That I have adhered to it and enjoyed

the beneficent effects of it through all time, I owe to my grandmother.

I have never drunk a drop from that day to this of any kind of water.













HONORED AS A CURIOSITY



If you get into conversation with a stranger in Honolulu, and experience

that natural desire to know what sort of ground you are treading on by

finding out what manner of man your stranger is, strike out boldly and

address him as "Captain."  Watch him narrowly, and if you see by his

countenance that you are on the wrong track, ask him where he preaches.

It is a safe bet that he is either a missionary or captain of a whaler.

I became personally acquainted with seventy-two captains and ninety-six

missionaries.  The captains and ministers form one-half of the

population; the third fourth is composed of common Kanakas and mercantile

foreigners and their families; and the final fourth is made up of high

officers of the Hawaiian Government.  And there are just about cats

enough for three apiece all around.



A solemn stranger met me in the suburbs one day, and said:



"Good morning, your reverence.  Preach in the stone church yonder, no

doubt!"



"No, I don't.  I'm not a preacher."



"Really, I beg your pardon, captain.  I trust you had a good season.  How

much oil--"



"Oil!  Why, what do you take me for?  I'm not a whaler."



"Oh!  I beg a thousand pardons, your Excellency.  Major-General in the

household troops, no doubt?  Minister of the Interior, likely?  Secretary

of War?  First Gentleman of the Bedchamber?  Commissioner of the Royal--"



"Stuff, man!  I'm not connected in any way with the government."



"Bless my life!  Then who the mischief are you? what the mischief are

you? and how the mischief did you get here? and where in thunder did you

come from?"



"I'm only a private personage--an unassuming stranger--lately arrived

from America."



"No!  Not a missionary! not a whaler! not a member of his Majesty's

government! not even a Secretary of the Navy!  Ah!  Heaven! it is too

blissful to be true, alas! I do but dream.  And yet that noble, honest

countenance--those oblique, ingenuous eyes--that massive head, incapable

of--of anything; your hand; give me your hand, bright waif.  Excuse these

tears.  For sixteen weary years I have yearned for a moment like this,

and--"



Here his feelings were too much for him, and he swooned away.  I pitied

this poor creature from the bottom of my heart.  I was deeply moved.

I shed a few tears on him, and kissed him for his mother.  I then took

what small change he had, and "shoved."













FIRST INTERVIEW WITH ARTEMUS WARD--[Written about 1870.]



I had never seen him before.  He brought letters of introduction from

mutual friends in San Francisco, and by invitation I breakfasted with

him.  It was almost religion, there in the silver-mines, to precede such

a meal with whisky cocktails.  Artemus, with the true cosmopolitan

instinct, always deferred to the customs of the country he was in, and so

he ordered three of those abominations.  Hingston was present.  I said I

would rather not drink a whisky cocktail.  I said it would go right to my

head, and confuse me so that I would be in a helpless tangle in ten

minutes.  I did not want to act like a lunatic before strangers.  But

Artemus gently insisted, and I drank the treasonable mixture under

protest, and felt all the time that I was doing a thing I might be sorry

for.  In a minute or two I began to imagine that my ideas were clouded.

I waited in great anxiety for the conversation to open, with a sort of

vague hope that my understanding would prove clear, after all, and my

misgivings groundless.



Artemus dropped an unimportant remark or two, and then assumed a look of

superhuman earnestness, and made the following astounding speech.  He

said:



"Now there is one thing I ought to ask you about before I forget it.  You

have been here in Silver land--here in Nevada--two or three years, and,

of course, your position on the daily press has made it necessary for you

to go down in the mines and examine them carefully in detail, and

therefore you know all about the silver-mining business.  Now what I want

to get at is--is, well, the way the deposits of ore are made, you know.

For instance.  Now, as I understand it, the vein which contains the

silver is sandwiched in between casings of granite, and runs along the

ground, and sticks up like a curb stone.  Well, take a vein forty feet

thick, for example, or eighty, for that matter, or even a hundred--say

you go down on it with a shaft, straight down, you know, or with what you

call 'incline' maybe you go down five hundred feet, or maybe you don't go

down but two hundred--anyway, you go down, and all the time this vein

grows narrower, when the casings come nearer or approach each other, you

may say--that is, when they do approach, which, of course, they do not

always do, particularly in cases where the nature of the formation is

such that they stand apart wider than they otherwise would, and which

geology has failed to account for, although everything in that science

goes to prove that, all things being equal, it would if it did not, or

would not certainly if it did, and then, of course, they are.  Do not you

think it is?"



I said to myself:



"Now I just knew how it would be--that whisky cocktail has done the

business for me; I don't understand any more than a clam."



And then I said aloud:



"I--I--that is--if you don't mind, would you--would you say that over

again?  I ought--"



"Oh, certainly, certainly!  You see I am very unfamiliar with the

subject, and perhaps I don't present my case clearly, but I--"



"No, no-no, no-you state it plain enough, but that cocktail has muddled

me a little.  But I will no, I do understand for that matter; but I would

get the hang of it all the better if you went over it again-and I'll pay

better attention this time."



He said; "Why, what I was after was this."



[Here he became even more fearfully impressive than ever, and emphasized

each particular point by checking it off on his finger-ends.]



"This vein, or lode, or ledge, or whatever you call it, runs along

between two layers of granite, just the same as if it were a sandwich.

Very well.  Now suppose you go down on that, say a thousand feet, or

maybe twelve hundred (it don't really matter) before you drift, and then

you start your drifts, some of them across the ledge, and others along

the length of it, where the sulphurets--I believe they call them

sulphurets, though why they should, considering that, so far as I can

see, the main dependence of a miner does not so lie, as some suppose, but

in which it cannot be successfully maintained, wherein the same should

not continue, while part and parcel of the same ore not committed to

either in the sense referred to, whereas, under different circumstances,

the most inexperienced among us could not detect it if it were, or might

overlook it if it did, or scorn the very idea of such a thing, even

though it were palpably demonstrated as such.  Am I not right?"



I said, sorrowfully: "I feel ashamed of myself, Mr.  Ward.  I know I

ought to understand you perfectly well, but you see that treacherous

whisky cocktail has got into my head, and now I cannot understand even

the simplest proposition.  I told you how it would be."



"Oh, don't mind it, don't mind it; the fault was my own, no doubt--though

I did think it clear enough for--"



"Don't say a word.  Clear!  Why, you stated it as clear as the sun to

anybody but an abject idiot; but it's that confounded cocktail that has

played the mischief."



"No; now don't say that.  I'll begin it all over again, and--"



"Don't now--for goodness' sake, don't do anything of the kind, because I

tell you my head is in such a condition that I don't believe I could

understand the most trifling question a man could ask me.



"Now don't you be afraid.  I'll put it so plain this time that you can't

help but get the hang of it.  We will begin at the very beginning."

[Leaning far across the table, with determined impressiveness wrought

upon his every feature, and fingers prepared to keep tally of each point

enumerated; and I, leaning forward with painful interest, resolved to

comprehend or perish.]  "You know the vein, the ledge, the thing that

contains the metal, whereby it constitutes the medium between all other

forces, whether of present or remote agencies, so brought to bear in

favor of the former against the latter, or the latter against the former

or all, or both, or compromising the relative differences existing within

the radius whence culminate the several degrees of similarity to which--"



I said: "Oh, hang my wooden head, it ain't any use!--it ain't any use to

try--I can't understand anything.  The plainer you get it the more I

can't get the hang of it."



I heard a suspicious noise behind me, and turned in time to see Hingston

dodging behind a newspaper, and quaking with a gentle ecstasy of

laughter.  I looked at Ward again, and he had thrown off his dread

solemnity and was laughing also.  Then I saw that I had been sold--that I

had been made a victim of a swindle in the way of a string of plausibly

worded sentences that didn't mean anything under the sun.  Artemus Ward

was one of the best fellows in the world, and one of the most

companionable.  It has been said that he was not fluent in conversation,

but, with the above experience in my mind, I differ.













CANNIBALISM IN THE CARS--[Written abort 1867.]



I visited St. Louis lately, and on my way West, after changing cars at

Terre Haute, Indiana, a mild, benevolent-looking gentleman of about

forty-five, or maybe fifty, came in at one of the way-stations and sat

down beside me.  We talked together pleasantly on various subjects for an

hour, perhaps, and I found him exceedingly intelligent and entertaining.

When he learned that I was from Washington, he immediately began to ask

questions about various public men, and about Congressional affairs; and

I saw very shortly that I was conversing with a man who was perfectly

familiar with the ins and outs of political life at the Capital, even to

the ways and manners, and customs of procedure of Senators and

Representatives in the Chambers of the national Legislature.  Presently

two men halted near us for a single moment, and one said to the other:



"Harris, if you'll do that for me, I'll never forget you, my boy."



My new comrade's eye lighted pleasantly.  The words had touched upon a

happy memory, I thought.  Then his face settled into thoughtfulness

--almost into gloom.  He turned to me and said,



"Let me tell you a story; let me give you a secret chapter of my life

--a chapter that has never been referred to by me since its events

transpired.  Listen patiently, and promise that you will not interrupt

me."



I said I would not, and he related the following strange adventure,

speaking sometimes with animation, sometimes with melancholy, but always

with feeling and earnestness.





                         THE STRANGER'S NARRATIVE



"On the 19th of December, 1853, I started from St. Louis on the evening

train bound for Chicago.  There were only twenty-four passengers, all

told.  There were no ladies and no children.  We were in excellent

spirits, and pleasant acquaintanceships were soon formed.  The journey

bade fair to be a happy one; and no individual in the party, I think, had

even the vaguest presentiment of the horrors we were soon to undergo.



"At 11 P.m.  it began to snow hard.  Shortly after leaving the small

village of Welden, we entered upon that tremendous prairie solitude that

stretches its leagues on leagues of houseless dreariness far away toward

the jubilee Settlements.  The winds, unobstructed by trees or hills, or

even vagrant rocks, whistled fiercely across the level desert, driving

the falling snow before it like spray from the crested waves of a stormy

sea.  The snow was deepening fast; and we knew, by the diminished speed

of the train, that the engine was plowing through it with steadily

increasing difficulty.  Indeed, it almost came to a dead halt sometimes,

in the midst of great drifts that piled themselves like colossal graves

across the track.  Conversation began to flag.  Cheerfulness gave place

to grave concern.  The possibility of being imprisoned in the snow, on

the bleak prairie, fifty miles from any house, presented itself to every

mind, and extended its depressing influence over every spirit.



"At two o'clock in the morning I was aroused out of an uneasy slumber by

the ceasing of all motion about me.  The appalling truth flashed upon me

instantly--we were captives in a snow-drift!  'All hands to the rescue!'

Every man sprang to obey.  Out into the wild night, the pitchy darkness,

the billowy snow, the driving storm, every soul leaped, with the

consciousness that a moment lost now might bring destruction to us all.

Shovels, hands, boards--anything, everything that could displace snow,

was brought into instant requisition.  It was a weird picture, that small

company of frantic men fighting the banking snows, half in the blackest

shadow and half in the angry light of the locomotive's reflector.



"One short hour sufficed to prove the utter uselessness of our efforts.

The storm barricaded the track with a dozen drifts while we dug one away.

And worse than this, it was discovered that the last grand charge the

engine had made upon the enemy had broken the fore-and-aft shaft of the

driving-wheel!  With a free track before us we should still have been

helpless.  We entered the car wearied with labor, and very sorrowful.

We gathered about the stoves, and gravely canvassed our situation.  We

had no provisions whatever--in this lay our chief distress.  We could not

freeze, for there was a good supply of wood in the tender.  This was our

only comfort.  The discussion ended at last in accepting the

disheartening decision of the conductor, viz., that it would be death for

any man to attempt to travel fifty miles on foot through snow like that.

We could not send for help, and even if we could it would not come.  We

must submit, and await, as patiently as we might, succor or starvation!

I think the stoutest heart there felt a momentary chill when those words

were uttered.



"Within the hour conversation subsided to a low murmur here and there

about the car, caught fitfully between the rising and falling of the

blast; the lamps grew dim; and the majority of the castaways settled

themselves among the flickering shadows to think--to forget the present,

if they could--to sleep, if they might.



"The eternal night-it surely seemed eternal to us-wore its lagging hours

away at last, and the cold gray dawn broke in the east.  As the light

grew stronger the passengers began to stir and give signs of life, one

after another, and each in turn pushed his slouched hat up from his

forehead, stretched his stiffened limbs, and glanced out of the windows

upon the cheerless prospect.  It was cheer less, indeed!-not a living

thing visible anywhere, not a human habitation; nothing but a vast white

desert; uplifted sheets of snow drifting hither and thither before the

wind--a world of eddying flakes shutting out the firmament above.



"All day we moped about the cars, saying little, thinking much.  Another

lingering dreary night--and hunger.



"Another dawning--another day of silence, sadness, wasting hunger,

hopeless watching for succor that could not come.  A night of restless

slumber, filled with dreams of feasting--wakings distressed with the

gnawings of hunger.



"The fourth day came and went--and the fifth!  Five days of dreadful

imprisonment!  A savage hunger looked out at every eye.  There was in it

a sign of awful import--the foreshadowing of a something that was vaguely

shaping itself in every heart--a something which no tongue dared yet to

frame into words.



"The sixth day passed--the seventh dawned upon as gaunt and haggard and

hopeless a company of men as ever stood in the shadow of death.  It must

out now!  That thing which had been growing up in every heart was ready

to leap from every lip at last!  Nature had been taxed to the utmost--she

must yield.  RICHARD H. GASTON of Minnesota, tall, cadaverous, and pale,

rose up.  All knew what was coming.  All prepared--every emotion, every

semblance of excitement--was smothered--only a calm, thoughtful

seriousness appeared in the eyes that were lately so wild.



"'Gentlemen: It cannot be delayed longer!  The time is at hand!  We must

determine which of us shall die to furnish food for the rest!'



"MR. JOHN J. WILLIAMS of Illinois rose and said: 'Gentlemen--I nominate

the Rev. James Sawyer of Tennessee.'



"MR. Wm. R. ADAMS of Indiana said: 'I nominate Mr. Daniel Slote of New

York.'



"MR. CHARLES J. LANGDON: 'I nominate Mr. Samuel A.  Bowen of St. Louis.'



"MR. SLOTE: 'Gentlemen--I desire to decline in favor of Mr. John A. Van

Nostrand, Jun., of New Jersey.'



"MR. GASTON: 'If there be no objection, the gentleman's desire will be

acceded to.'



"MR. VAN NOSTRAND objecting, the resignation of Mr. Slote was rejected.

The resignations of Messrs. Sawyer and Bowen were also offered, and

refused upon the same grounds.



"MR. A. L. BASCOM of Ohio: 'I move that the nominations now close, and

that the House proceed to an election by ballot.'



"MR. SAWYER: 'Gentlemen--I protest earnestly against these proceedings.

They are, in every way, irregular and unbecoming.  I must beg to move

that they be dropped at once, and that we elect a chairman of the meeting

and proper officers to assist him, and then we can go on with the

business before us understandingly.'



"MR. BELL of Iowa: 'Gentlemen--I object.  This is no time to stand upon

forms and ceremonious observances.  For more than seven days we have been

without food.  Every moment we lose in idle discussion increases our

distress.  I am satisfied with the nominations that have been made--every

gentleman present is, I believe--and I, for one, do not see why we should

not proceed at once to elect one or more of them.  I wish to offer a

resolution--'



"MR. GASTON: 'It would be objected to, and have to lie over one day under

the rules, thus bringing about the very delay you wish to avoid.  The

gentleman from New Jersey--'



"MR. VAN NOSTRAND: 'Gentlemen--I am a stranger among you; I have not

sought the distinction that has been conferred upon me, and I feel a

delicacy--'



"MR. MORGAN Of Alabama (interrupting): 'I move the previous question.'



"The motion was carried, and further debate shut off, of course.  The

motion to elect officers was passed, and under it Mr. Gaston was chosen

chairman, Mr. Blake, secretary, Messrs.  Holcomb, Dyer, and Baldwin a

committee on nominations, and Mr. R. M. Howland, purveyor, to assist the

committee in making selections.



"A recess of half an hour was then taken, and some little caucusing

followed.  At the sound of the gavel the meeting reassembled, and the

committee reported in favor of Messrs. George Ferguson of Kentucky,

Lucien Herrman of Louisiana, and W. Messick of Colorado as candidates.

The report was accepted.



"MR. ROGERS of Missouri: 'Mr. President The report being properly before

the House now, I move to amend it by substituting for the name of Mr.

Herrman that of Mr. Lucius Harris of St.  Louis, who is well and

honorably known to us all.  I do not wish to be understood as casting the

least reflection upon the high character and standing of the gentleman

from Louisiana far from it.  I respect and esteem him as much as any

gentleman here present possibly can; but none of us can be blind to the

fact that he has lost more flesh during the week that we have lain here

than any among us--none of us can be blind to the fact that the committee

has been derelict in its duty, either through negligence or a graver

fault, in thus offering for our suffrages a gentleman who, however pure

his own motives may be, has really less nutriment in him--'



"THE CHAIR: 'The gentleman from Missouri will take his seat.  The Chair

cannot allow the integrity of the committee to be questioned save by the

regular course, under the rules.  What action will the House take upon

the gentleman's motion?'



"MR. HALLIDAY of Virginia: 'I move to further amend the report by

substituting Mr. Harvey Davis of Oregon for Mr. Messick.  It may be urged

by gentlemen that the hardships and privations of a frontier life have

rendered Mr.  Davis tough; but, gentlemen, is this a time to cavil at

toughness?  Is this a time to be fastidious concerning trifles?  Is this

a time to dispute about matters of paltry significance?  No, gentlemen,

bulk is what we desire--substance, weight, bulk--these are the supreme

requisites now--not talent, not genius, not education.  I insist upon my

motion.'



"MR. MORGAN (excitedly): 'Mr.  Chairman--I do most strenuously object to

this amendment.  The gentleman from Oregon is old, and furthermore is

bulky only in bone--not in flesh.  I ask the gentleman from Virginia if

it is soup we want instead of solid sustenance? if he would delude us

with shadows? if he would mock our suffering with an Oregonian specter?

I ask him if he can look upon the anxious faces around him, if he can

gaze into our sad eyes, if he can listen to the beating of our expectant

hearts, and still thrust this famine-stricken fraud upon us?  I ask him

if he can think of our desolate state, of our past sorrows, of our dark

future, and still unpityingly foist upon us this wreck, this ruin, this

tottering swindle, this gnarled and blighted and sapless vagabond from

Oregon's hospitable shores?  Never!' [Applause.]



"The amendment was put to vote, after a fiery debate, and lost.  Mr.

Harris was substituted on the first amendment.  The balloting then began.

Five ballots were held without a choice.  On the sixth, Mr.  Harris was

elected, all voting for him but himself.  It was then moved that his

election should be ratified by acclamation, which was lost, in

consequence of his again voting against himself.



"MR. RADWAY moved that the House now take up the remaining candidates,

and go into an election for breakfast.  This was carried.



"On the first ballot--there was a tie, half the members favoring one

candidate on account of his youth, and half favoring the other on account

of his superior size.  The President gave the casting vote for the

latter, Mr. Messick.  This decision created considerable dissatisfaction

among the friends of Mr. Ferguson, the defeated candidate, and there was

some talk of demanding a new ballot; but in the midst of it a motion to

adjourn was carried, and the meeting broke up at once.



"The preparations for supper diverted the attention of the Ferguson

faction from the discussion of their grievance for a long time, and then,

when they would have taken it up again, the happy announcement that Mr.

Harris was ready drove all thought of it to the winds.



"We improvised tables by propping up the backs of car-seats, and sat down

with hearts full of gratitude to the finest supper that had blessed our

vision for seven torturing days.  How changed we were from what we had

been a few short hours before!  Hopeless, sad-eyed misery, hunger,

feverish anxiety, desperation, then; thankfulness, serenity, joy too deep

for utterance now.  That I know was the cheeriest hour of my eventful

life.  The winds howled, and blew the snow wildly about our prison house,

but they were powerless to distress us any more.  I liked Harris.  He

might have been better done, perhaps, but I am free to say that no man

ever agreed with me better than Harris, or afforded me so large a degree

of satisfaction.  Messick was very well, though rather high-flavored,

but for genuine nutritiousness and delicacy of fiber, give me Harris.

Messick had his good points--I will not attempt to deny it, nor do I wish

to do it but he was no more fitted for breakfast than a mummy would be,

sir--not a bit.  Lean?--why, bless me!--and tough?  Ah, he was very

tough!  You could not imagine it--you could never imagine anything like

it."



"Do you mean to tell me that--"



"Do not interrupt me, please.  After breakfast we elected a man by the

name of Walker, from Detroit, for supper.  He was very good.  I wrote his

wife so afterward.  He was worthy of all praise.  I shall always remember

Walker.  He was a little rare, but very good.  And then the next morning

we had Morgan of Alabama for breakfast. He was one of the finest men I

ever sat down to handsome, educated, refined, spoke several languages

fluently a perfect gentleman he was a perfect gentleman, and singularly

juicy.  For supper we had that Oregon patriarch, and he was a fraud,

there is no question about it--old, scraggy, tough, nobody can picture

the reality.  I finally said, gentlemen, you can do as you like, but I

will wait for another election.  And Grimes of Illinois said, 'Gentlemen,

I will wait also.  When you elect a man that has something to recommend

him, I shall be glad to join you again.'  It soon became evident that

there was general dissatisfaction with Davis of Oregon, and so, to

preserve the good will that had prevailed so pleasantly since we had had

Harris, an election was called, and the result of it was that Baker of

Georgia was chosen.  He was splendid!  Well, well--after that we had

Doolittle, and Hawkins, and McElroy (there was some complaint about

McElroy, because he was uncommonly short and thin), and Penrod, and two

Smiths, and Bailey (Bailey had a wooden leg, which was clear loss, but he

was otherwise good), and an Indian boy, and an organ-grinder, and a

gentleman by the name of Buckminster--a poor stick of a vagabond that

wasn't any good for company and no account for breakfast.  We were glad

we got him elected before relief came."



"And so the blessed relief did come at last?"



"Yes, it came one bright, sunny morning, just after election.  John

Murphy was the choice, and there never was a better, I am willing to

testify; but John Murphy came home with us, in the train that came to

succor us, and lived to marry the widow Harris--"



"Relict of--"



"Relict of our first choice.  He married her, and is happy and respected

and prosperous yet.  Ah, it was like a novel, sir--it was like a romance.

This is my stopping-place, sir; I must bid you goodby.  Any time that you

can make it convenient to tarry a day or two with me, I shall be glad to

have you.  I like you, sir; I have conceived an affection for you.

I could like you as well as I liked Harris himself, sir.  Good day, sir,

and a pleasant journey."



He was gone.  I never felt so stunned, so distressed, so bewildered in my

life.  But in my soul I was glad he was gone.  With all his gentleness of

manner and his soft voice, I shuddered whenever he turned his hungry eye

upon me; and when I heard that I had achieved his perilous affection, and

that I stood almost with the late Harris in his esteem, my heart fairly

stood still!



I was bewildered beyond description.  I did not doubt his word; I could

not question a single item in a statement so stamped with the earnestness

of truth as his; but its dreadful details overpowered me, and threw my

thoughts into hopeless confusion.  I saw the conductor looking at me.

I said, "Who is that man?"



"He was a member of Congress once, and a good one.  But he got caught in

a snow-drift in the cars, and like to have been starved to death.  He got

so frost-bitten and frozen up generally, and used up for want of

something to eat, that he was sick and out of his head two or three

months afterward.  He is all right now, only he is a monomaniac, and when

he gets on that old subject he never stops till he has eat up that whole

car-load of people he talks about.  He would have finished the crowd by

this time, only he had to get out here.  He has got their names as pat as

A B C.  When he gets them all eat up but himself, he always says: 'Then

the hour for the usual election for breakfast having arrived; and there

being no opposition, I was duly elected, after which, there being no

objections offered, I resigned.  Thus I am here.'"



I felt inexpressibly relieved to know that I had only been listening to

the harmless vagaries of a madman instead of the genuine experiences of a

bloodthirsty cannibal.













THE KILLING OF JULIUS CAESAR "LOCALIZED"--[Written about 1865.]



Being the only true and reliable account ever published; taken from the

Roman "Daily Evening Fasces," of the date of that tremendous occurrence.



Nothing in the world affords a newspaper reporter so much satisfaction as

gathering up the details of a bloody and mysterious murder and writing

them up with aggravating circumstantiality.  He takes a living delight in

this labor of love--for such it is to him, especially if he knows that

all the other papers have gone to press, and his will be the only one

that will contain the dreadful intelligence.  A feeling of regret has

often come over me that I was not reporting in Rome when Caesar was

killed--reporting on an evening paper, and the only one in the city, and

getting at least twelve hours ahead of the morning-paper boys with this

most magnificent "item" that ever fell to the lot of the craft.  Other

events have happened as startling as this, but none that possessed so

peculiarly all the characteristics of the favorite "item" of the present

day, magnified into grandeur and sublimity by the high rank, fame, and

social and political standing of the actors in it.



However, as I was not permitted to report Caesar's assassination in the

regular way, it has at least afforded me rare satisfaction to translate

the following able account of it from the original Latin of the Roman

Daily Evening Fasces of that date--second edition:





Our usually quiet city of Rome was thrown into a state of wild excitement

yesterday by the occurrence of one of those bloody affrays which sicken

the heart and fill the soul with fear, while they inspire all thinking

men with forebodings for the future of a city where human life is held so

cheaply and the gravest laws are so openly set at defiance.  As the

result of that affray, it is our painful duty, as public journalists, to

record the death of one of our most esteemed citizens--a man whose name

is known wherever this paper circulates, and where fame it has been our

pleasure and our privilege to extend, and also to protect from the tongue

of slander and falsehood, to the best of our poor ability.  We refer to

Mr. J. Caesar, the Emperor-elect.



The facts of the case, as nearly as our reporter could determine them

from the conflicting statements of eye-witnesses, were about as

follows:-- The affair was an election row, of course.  Nine-tenths of the

ghastly butcheries that disgrace the city nowadays grow out of the

bickerings and jealousies and animosities engendered by these accursed

elections.  Rome would be the gainer by it if her very constables were

elected to serve a century; for in our experience we have never even been

able to choose a dog-pelter without celebrating the event with a dozen

knockdowns and a general cramming of the station-house with drunken

vagabonds overnight. It is said that when the immense majority for Caesar

at the polls in the market was declared the other day, and the crown was

offered to that gentleman, even his amazing unselfishness in refusing it

three times was not sufficient to save him from the whispered insults of

such men as Casca, of the Tenth Ward, and other hirelings of the

disappointed candidate, hailing mostly from the Eleventh and Thirteenth

and other outside districts, who were overheard speaking ironically and

contemptuously of Mr. Caesar's conduct upon that occasion.



We are further informed that there are many among us who think they are

justified in believing that the assassination of Julius Caesar was a

put-up thing--a cut-and-dried arrangement, hatched by Marcus Brutus and a

lot of his hired roughs, and carried out only too faithfully according to

the program.  Whether there be good grounds for this suspicion or not, we

leave to the people to judge for themselves, only asking that they will

read the following account of the sad occurrence carefully and

dispassionately before they render that judgment.



The Senate was already in session, and Caesar was coming down the street

toward the capitol, conversing with some personal friends, and followed,

as usual, by a large number of citizens.  Just as he was passing in front

of Demosthenes and Thucydides' drug store, he was observing casually to a

gentleman, who, our informant thinks, is a fortune-teller, that the Ides

of March were come.  The reply was, "Yes, they are come, but not gone

yet."  At this moment Artemidorus stepped up and passed the time of day,

and asked Caesar to read a schedule or a tract or something of the kind,

which he had brought for his perusal.  Mr. Decius Brutus also said

something about an "humble suit" which he wanted read.  Artexnidorus

begged that attention might be paid to his first, because it was of

personal consequence to Caesar.  The latter replied that what concerned

himself should be read last, or words to that effect.  Artemidorus begged

and beseeched him to read the paper instantly!--[Mark that: It is hinted

by William Shakespeare, who saw the beginning and the end of the

unfortunate affray, that this "schedule" was simply a note discovering to

Caesar that a plot was brewing to take his life.]--However, Caesar

shook him off, and refused to read any petition in the street.  He then

entered the capitol, and the crowd followed him.



About this time the following conversation was overheard, and we consider

that, taken in connection with the events which succeeded it, it bears an

appalling significance:  Mr. Papilius Lena remarked to George W. Cassias

(commonly known as the "Nobby Boy of the Third Ward"), a bruiser in the

pay of the Opposition, that he hoped his enterprise to-day might thrive;

and when Cassias asked "What enterprise?" he only closed his left eye

temporarily and said with simulated indifference, "Fare you well," and

sauntered toward Caesar.  Marcus Brutus, who is suspected of being the

ringleader of the band that killed Caesar, asked what it was that Lena

had said.  Cassias told him, and added in a low tone, "I fear our purpose

is discovered."



Brutus told his wretched accomplice to keep an eye on Lena, and a moment

after Cassias urged that lean and hungry vagrant, Casca, whose reputation

here is none of the best, to be sudden, for he feared prevention.  He

then turned to Brutus, apparently much excited, and asked what should be

done, and swore that either he or Caesar would never turn back--he would

kill himself first.  At this time Caesar was talking to some of the

back-country members about the approaching fall elections, and paying

little attention to what was going on around him.  Billy Trebonius got

into conversation with the people's friend and Caesar's--Mark Antony--and

under some pretense or other got him away, and Brutus, Decius, Casca,

Cinna, Metellus Cimber, and others of the gang of infamous desperadoes

that infest Rome at present, closed around the doomed Caesar.  Then

Metellus Cimber knelt down and begged that his brother might be recalled

from banishment, but Caesar rebuked him for his fawning conduct, and

refused to grant his petition.  Immediately, at Cimber's request, first

Brutus and then Cassias begged for the return of the banished Publius;

but Caesar still refused.  He said he could not be moved; that he was as

fixed as the North Star, and proceeded to speak in the most complimentary

terms of the firmness of that star and its steady character.  Then he

said he was like it, and he believed he was the only man in the country

that was; therefore, since he was "constant" that Cimber should be

banished, he was also "constant" that he should stay banished, and he'd

be hanged if he didn't keep him so!



Instantly seizing upon this shallow pretext for a fight, Casca sprang at

Caesar and struck him with a dirk, Caesar grabbing him by the arm with

his right hand, and launching a blow straight from the shoulder with his

left, that sent the reptile bleeding to the earth.  He then backed up

against Pompey's statue, and squared himself to receive his assailants.

Cassias and Cimber and Cinna rushed, upon him with their daggers drawn,

and the former succeeded in inflicting a wound upon his body; but before

he could strike again, and before either of the others could strike at

all, Caesar stretched the three miscreants at his feet with as many blows

of his powerful fist.  By this time the Senate was in an indescribable

uproar; the throng of citizens is the lobbies had blockaded the doors in

their frantic efforts to escape from the building, the sergeant-at-arms

and his assistants were struggling with the assassins, venerable senators

had cast aside their encumbering robes, and were leaping over benches and

flying down the aisles in wild confusion toward the shelter of the

committee-rooms, and a thousand voices were shouting "Po-lice!  Po-lice!"

in discordant tones that rose above the frightful din like shrieking

winds above the roaring of a tempest.  And amid it all great Caesar stood

with his back against the statue, like a lion at bay, and fought his

assailants weaponless and hand to hand, with the defiant bearing and the

unwavering courage which he had shown before on many a bloody field.

Billy Trebonius and Caius Legarius struck him with their daggers and

fell, as their brother-conspirators before them had fallen.  But at last,

when Caesar saw his old friend Brutus step forward armed with a murderous

knife, it is said he seemed utterly overpowered with grief and amazement,

and, dropping his invincible left arm by his side, he hid his face in the

folds of his mantle and received the treacherous blow without an effort

to stay the hand that gave it.  He only said, "Et tu, Brute?" and fell

lifeless on the marble pavement.



We learn that the coat deceased had on when he was killed was the same

one he wore in his tent on the afternoon of the day he overcame the

Nervii, and that when it was removed from the corpse it was found to be

cut and gashed in no less than seven different places.  There was nothing

in the pockets.  It will be exhibited at the coroner's inquest, and will

be damning proof of the fact of the killing.  These latter facts may be

relied on, as we get them from Mark Antony, whose position enables him to

learn every item of news connected with the one subject of absorbing

interest of-to-day.



LATER: While the coroner was summoning a jury, Mark Antony and other

friends of the late Caesar got hold of the body, and lugged it off to the

Forum, and at last accounts Antony and Brutus were making speeches over

it and raising such a row among the people that, as we go to press, the

chief of police is satisfied there is going to be a riot, and is taking

measures accordingly.













THE WIDOW'S PROTEST



One of the saddest things that ever came under my notice (said the

banker's clerk) was there in Corning during the war.  Dan Murphy enlisted

as a private, and fought very bravely.  The boys all liked him, and when

a wound by and by weakened him down till carrying a musket was too heavy

work for him, they clubbed together and fixed him up as a sutler.  He

made money then, and sent it always to his wife to bank for him.  She was

a washer and ironer, and knew enough by hard experience to keep money

when she got it.  She didn't waste a penny.



On the contrary, she began to get miserly as her bank-account grew.  She

grieved to part with a cent, poor creature, for twice in her hard-working

life she had known what it was to be hungry, cold, friendless, sick, and

without a dollar in the world, and she had a haunting dread of suffering

so again.  Well, at last Dan died; and the boys, in testimony of their

esteem and respect for him, telegraphed to Mrs. Murphy to know if she

would like to have him embalmed and sent home; when you know the usual

custom was to dump a poor devil like him into a shallow hole, and then

inform his friends what had become of him.  Mrs.  Murphy jumped to the

conclusion that it would only cost two or three dollars to embalm her

dead husband, and so she telegraphed "Yes."  It was at the "wake" that

the bill for embalming arrived and was presented to the widow.



She uttered a wild, sad wail that pierced every heart, and said,

"Sivinty-foive dollars for stooffin' Dan, blister their sowls!  Did thim

divils suppose I was goin' to stairt a Museim, that I'd be dalin' in such

expinsive curiassities !"



The banker's clerk said there was not a dry eye in the house.













THE SCRIPTURAL PANORAMIST--[Written about 1866.]



"There was a fellow traveling around in that country," said Mr.

Nickerson, "with a moral-religious show--a sort of scriptural panorama

--and he hired a wooden-headed old slab to play the piano for him.

After the first night's performance the showman says:



"'My friend, you seem to know pretty much all the tunes there are, and

you worry along first rate.  But then, didn't you notice that sometimes

last night the piece you happened to be playing was a little rough on the

proprieties, so to speak--didn't seem to jibe with the general gait of

the picture that was passing at the time, as it were--was a little

foreign to the subject, you know--as if you didn't either trump or follow

suit, you understand?'



"'Well, no,' the fellow said; 'he hadn't noticed, but it might be; he had

played along just as it came handy.'



"So they put it up that the simple old dummy was to keep his eye on the

panorama after that, and as soon as a stunning picture was reeled out he

was to fit it to a dot with a piece of music that would help the audience

to get the idea of the subject, and warm them up like a camp-meeting

revival.  That sort of thing would corral their sympathies, the showman

said.



"There was a big audience that night-mostly middle-aged and old people

who belong to the church, and took a strong interest in Bible matters,

and the balance were pretty much young bucks and heifers--they always

come out strong on panoramas, you know, because it gives them a chance to

taste one another's complexions in the dark.



"Well, the showman began to swell himself up for his lecture, and the old

mud-Jobber tackled the piano and ran his fingers up and down once or

twice to see that she was all right, and the fellows behind the curtain

commenced to grind out the panorama.  The showman balanced his weight on

his right foot, and propped his hands over his hips, and flung his eyes

over his shoulder at the scenery, and said:



"'Ladies and gentlemen, the painting now before you illustrates the

beautiful and touching parable of the Prodigal Son.  Observe the happy

expression just breaking over the features of the poor, suffering youth

--so worn and weary with his long march; note also the ecstasy beaming

from the uplifted countenance of the aged father, and the joy that

sparkles in the eyes of the excited group of youths and maidens, and

seems ready to burst into the welcoming chorus from their lips.  The

lesson, my friends, is as solemn and instructive as the story is tender

and beautiful.'



"The mud-Jobber was all ready, and when the second speech was finished,

struck up:



                    "Oh, we'll all get blind drunk

                    When Johnny comes marching home!



"Some of the people giggled, and some groaned a little.  The showman

couldn't say a word; he looked at the pianist sharp, but he was all

lovely and serene--he didn't know there was anything out of gear.



"The panorama moved on, and the showman drummed up his grit and started

in fresh.



"'Ladies and gentlemen, the fine picture now unfolding itself to your

gaze exhibits one of the most notable events in Bible history--our

Saviour and His disciples upon the Sea of Galilee.  How grand, how

awe-inspiring are the reflections which the subject invokes!  What

sublimity of faith is revealed to us in this lesson from the sacred

writings!  The Saviour rebukes the angry waves, and walks securely

upon the bosom of the deep!'



"All around the house they were whispering, 'Oh, how lovely, how

beautiful!' and the orchestra let himself out again:



                    "A life on the ocean wave,

                    And a home on the rolling deep!



"There was a good deal of honest snickering turned on this time, and

considerable groaning, and one or two old deacons got up and went out.

The showman grated his teeth, and cursed the piano man to himself; but

the fellow sat there like a knot on a log, and seemed to think he was

doing first-rate.



"After things got quiet the showman thought he would make one more

stagger at it, anyway, though his confidence was beginning to get mighty

shaky.  The supes started the panorama grinding along again, and he says:



"'Ladies and gentlemen, this exquisite painting represents the raising of

Lazarus from the dead by our Saviour.  The subject has been handled with

marvelous skill by the artist, and such touching sweetness and tenderness

of expression has he thrown into it that I have known peculiarly

sensitive persons to be even affected to tears by looking at it.  Observe

the half-confused, half-inquiring look upon the countenance of the

awakened Lazarus.  Observe, also, the attitude and expression of the

Saviour, who takes him gently by the sleeve of his shroud with one hand,

while He points with the other toward the distant city.'



"Before anybody could get off an opinion in the case the innocent old ass

at the piano struck up:



                    "Come rise up, William Ri-i-ley,

                    And go along with me!



"Whe-ew!  All the solemn old flats got up in a huff to go, and everybody

else laughed till the windows rattled.



"The showman went down and grabbed the orchestra and shook him up and

says:



"'That lets you out, you know, you chowder-headed old clam.  Go to the

doorkeeper and get your money, and cut your stick--vamose the ranch!

Ladies and gentlemen, circumstances over which I have no control compel

me prematurely to dismiss the house.'"













CURING A COLD--[Written about 1864]



It is a good thing, perhaps, to write for the amusement of the public,

but it is a far higher and nobler thing to write for their instruction,

their profit, their actual and tangible benefit.  The latter is the sole

object of this article.  If it prove the means of restoring to health one

solitary sufferer among my race, of lighting up once more the fire of

hope and joy in his faded eyes, or bringing back to his dead heart again

the quick, generous impulses of other days, I shall be amply rewarded for

my labor; my soul will be permeated with the sacred delight a Christian.

feels when he has done a good, unselfish deed.



Having led a pure and blameless life, I am justified in believing that no

man who knows me will reject the suggestions I am about to make, out of

fear that I am trying to deceive him.  Let the public do itself the honor

to read my experience in doctoring a cold, as herein set forth, and then

follow in my footsteps.



When the White House was burned in Virginia City, I lost my home, my

happiness, my constitution, and my trunk.  The loss of the two first

named articles was a matter of no great consequence, since a home without

a mother, or a sister, or a distant young female relative in it, to

remind you, by putting your soiled linen out of sight and taking your

boots down off the mantelpiece, that there are those who think about you

and care for you, is easily obtained.  And I cared nothing for the loss

of my happiness, because, not being a poet, it could not be possible that

melancholy would abide with me long.  But to lose a good constitution and

a better trunk were serious misfortunes.  On the day of the fire my

constitution succumbed to a severe cold, caused by undue exertion in

getting ready to do something.  I suffered to no purpose, too, because

the plan I was figuring at for the extinguishing of the fire was so

elaborate that I never got it completed until the middle of the following

week.



The first time I began to sneeze, a friend told me to go and bathe my

feet in hot water and go to bed.  I did so.  Shortly afterward, another

friend advised me to get up and take a cold shower-bath.  I did that

also.  Within the hour, another friend assured me that it was policy to

"feed a cold and starve a fever."  I had both.  So I thought it best to

fill myself up for the cold, and then keep dark and let the fever starve

awhile.



In a case of, this kind, I seldom do things by halves; I ate pretty

heartily; I conferred my custom upon a stranger who had just opened his

restaurant that morning; he waited near me in respectful silence until I

had finished feeding my cold, when he inquired if the people about

Virginia City were much afflicted with colds?  I told him I thought they

were.  He then went out and took in his sign.



I started down toward the office, and on the way encountered another

bosom friend, who told me that a quart of salt-water, taken warm, would

come as near curing a cold as anything in the world.  I hardly thought I

had room for it, but I tried it anyhow.  The result was surprising.  I

believed I had thrown up my immortal soul.



Now, as I am giving my experience only for the benefit of those who are

troubled with the distemper I am writing about, I feel that they will see

the propriety of my cautioning them against following such portions of it

as proved inefficient with me, and acting upon this conviction, I warn

them against warm salt-water.  It may be a good enough remedy, but I

think it is too severe.  If I had another cold in the head, and there

were no course left me but to take either an earthquake or a quart of

warm saltwater, I would take my chances on the earthquake.



After the storm which had been raging in my stomach had subsided, and no

more good Samaritans happening along, I went on borrowing handkerchiefs

again and blowing them to atoms, as had been my custom in the early

stages of my cold, until I came across a lady who had just arrived from

over the plains, and who said she had lived in a part of the country

where doctors were scarce, and had from necessity acquired considerable

skill in the treatment of simple "family complaints."  I knew she must

have had much experience, for she appeared to be a hundred and fifty

years old.



She mixed a decoction composed of molasses, aquafortis, turpentine, and

various other drugs, and instructed me to take a wine-glass full of it

every fifteen minutes.  I never took but one dose; that was enough; it

robbed me of all moral principle, and awoke every unworthy impulse of my

nature.  Under its malign influence my brain conceived miracles of

meanness, but my hands were too feeble to execute them; at that time, had

it not been that my strength had surrendered to a succession of assaults

from infallible remedies for my cold, I am satisfied that I would have

tried to rob the graveyard.  Like most other people, I often feel mean,

and act accordingly; but until I took that medicine I had never reveled

in such supernatural depravity, and felt proud of it.  At the end of two

days I was ready to go to doctoring again.  I took a few more unfailing

remedies, and finally drove my cold from my head to my lungs.



I got to coughing incessantly, and my voice fell below zero; I conversed

in a thundering bass, two octaves below my natural tone; I could only

compass my regular nightly repose by coughing myself down to a state of

utter exhaustion, and then the moment I began to talk in my sleep, my

discordant voice woke me up again.



My case grew more and more serious every day.  A Plain gin was

recommended; I took it.  Then gin and molasses; I took that also.  Then

gin and onions; I added the onions, and took all three.  I detected no

particular result, however, except that I had acquired a breath like a

buzzard's.



I found I had to travel for my health.  I went to Lake Bigler with my

reportorial comrade, Wilson.  It is gratifying to me to reflect that we

traveled in considerable style; we went in the Pioneer coach, and my

friend took all his baggage with him, consisting of two excellent silk

handkerchiefs and a daguerreotype of his grandmother.  We sailed and

hunted and fished and danced all day, and I doctored my cough all night.

By managing in this way, I made out to improve every hour in the

twenty-four.  But my disease continued to grow worse.



A sheet-bath was recommended.  I had never refused a remedy yet, and it

seemed poor policy to commence then; therefore I determined to take a

sheet-bath, notwithstanding I had no idea what sort of arrangement it

was.  It was administered at midnight, and the weather was very frosty.

My breast and back were bared, and a sheet (there appeared to be a

thousand yards of it) soaked in ice-water, was wound around me until I

resembled a swab for a Columbiad.



It is a cruel expedient.  When the chilly rag touches one's warm flesh,

it makes him start with sudden violence, and gasp for breath just as men

do in the death-agony.  It froze the marrow in my bones and stopped the

beating of my heart.  I thought my time had come.



Young Wilson said the circumstance reminded him of an anecdote about a

negro who was being baptized, and who slipped from the parson's grasp,

and came near being drowned.  He floundered around, though, and finally

rose up out of the water considerably strangled and furiously angry, and

started ashore at once, spouting water like a whale, and remarking, with

great asperity, that "one o' dese days some gen'l'man's nigger gwyne to

get killed wid jis' such damn foolishness as dis!"



Never take a sheet-bath-never.  Next to meeting a lady acquaintance who,

for reasons best known to herself, don't see you when she looks at you,

and don't know you when she does see you, it is the most uncomfortable

thing in the world.



But, as I was saying, when the sheet-bath failed to cure my cough,

a lady friend recommended the application of a mustard plaster to my

breast.  I believe that would have cured me effectually, if it had not

been for young Wilson.  When I went to bed, I put my mustard plaster

--which was a very gorgeous one, eighteen inches square--where I could

reach it when I was ready for it.  But young Wilson got hungry in the

night, and here is food for the imagination.



After sojourning a week at Lake Bigler, I went to Steamboat Springs, and,

besides the steam-baths, I took a lot of the vilest medicines that were

ever concocted.  They would have cured me, but I had to go back to

Virginia City, where, notwithstanding the variety of new remedies I

absorbed every day, I managed to aggravate my disease by carelessness and

undue exposure.



I finally concluded to visit San Francisco, and the, first day I got

there a lady at the hotel told me to drink a quart of whisky every

twenty-four hours, and a friend up-town recommended precisely the same

course.  Each advised me to take a quart; that made half a gallon.  I did

it, and still live.



Now, with the kindest motives in the world, I offer for the consideration

of consumptive patients the variegated course of treatment I have lately

gone through.  Let them try it; if it don't cure, it can't more than kill

them.













A CURIOUS PLEASURE EXCURSION



--[Published at the time of the "Comet Scare" in the summer of 1874]



[We have received the following advertisement, but, inasmuch as it

concerns a matter of deep and general interest, we feel fully justified

in inserting it in our reading-columns.  We are confident that our

conduct in this regard needs only explanation, not apology.--Ed., N. Y.

Herald.]





ADVERTISEMENT



This is to inform the public that in connection with Mr. Barnum I have

leased the comet for a term, of years; and I desire also to solicit the

public patronage in favor of a beneficial enterprise which we have in

view.



We propose to fit up comfortable, and even luxurious, accommodations in

the comet for as many persons as will honor us with their patronage, and

make an extended excursion among the heavenly bodies.  We shall prepare

1,000,000 state-rooms in the tail of the comet (with hot and cold water,

gas, looking-glass, parachute, umbrella, etc., in each), and shall

construct more if we meet with a sufficiently generous encouragement.

We shall have billiard-rooms, card-rooms, music-rooms, bowling-alleys and

many spacious theaters and free libraries; and on the main deck we

propose to have a driving park, with upward of 100,000 miles of roadway

in it.  We shall publish daily newspapers also.





                          DEPARTURE OF THE COMET



The comet will leave New York at 10 P.M.  on the 20th inst., and

therefore it will be desirable that the passengers be on board by eight

at the latest, to avoid confusion in getting under way.  It is not known

whether passports will be necessary or not, but it is deemed best that

passengers provide them, and so guard against all contingencies.  No dogs

will be allowed on board.  This rule has been made in deference to the

existing state of feeling regarding these animals, and will be strictly

adhered to.  The safety of the passengers will in all ways be jealously

looked to.  A substantial iron railing will be put up all around the

comet, and no one will be allowed to go to the edge and look over unless

accompanied by either my partner or myself.





                            THE POSTAL SERVICE



will be of the completest character.  Of course the telegraph, and the

telegraph only, will be employed; consequently friends occupying

state-rooms 20,000,000 and even 30,000,000 miles apart will be able to

send a message and receive a reply inside of eleven days.  Night messages

will be half-rate.  The whole of this vast postal system will be under

the personal superintendence of Mr. Hale of Maine.  Meals served at all

hours.  Meals served in staterooms charged extra.



Hostility is not apprehended from any great planet, but we have thought

it best to err on the safe side, and therefore have provided a proper

number of mortars, siege-guns, and boarding-pikes.  History shows that

small, isolated communities, such as the people of remote islands, are

prone to be hostile to strangers, and so the same may be the case with





                         THE INHABITANTS OF STARS



of the tenth or twentieth magnitude.  We shall in no case wantonly offend

the people of any star, but shall treat all alike with urbanity and

kindliness, never conducting ourselves toward an asteroid after a fashion

which we could not venture to assume toward Jupiter or Saturn.  I repeat

that we shall not wantonly offend any star; but at the same time we shall

promptly resent any injury that may be done us, or any insolence offered

us, by parties or governments residing in any star in the firmament.

Although averse to the shedding of blood, we shall still hold this course

rigidly and fearlessly, not only toward single stars, but toward

constellations.  We shall hope to leave a good impression of America

behind us in every nation we visit, from Venus to Uranus.  And, at all

events, if we cannot inspire love we shall at least compel respect for

our country wherever we go.  We shall take with us, free of charge,





                      A GREAT FORCE OF MISSIONARIES,



and shed the true light upon all the celestial orbs which, physically

aglow, are yet morally in darkness.  Sunday-schools will be established

wherever practicable.  Compulsory education will also be introduced.



The comet will visit Mars first, and proceed to Mercury, Jupiter, Venus,

and Saturn.  Parties connected with the government of the District of

Columbia and with the former city government of New York, who may desire

to inspect the rings, will be allowed time and every facility.  Every

star of prominent magnitude will be visited, and time allowed for

excursions to points of interest inland.





                               THE DOG STAR



has been stricken from the program.  Much time will be spent in the Great

Bear, and, indeed, in every constellation of importance.  So, also, with

the Sun and Moon and the Milky Pay, otherwise the Gulf Stream of the

Skies.  Clothing suitable for wear in the sun should be provided.  Our

program has been so arranged that we shall seldom go more than

100,000,000 of miles at a time without stopping at some star.  This will

necessarily make the stoppages frequent and preserve the interest of the

tourist.  Baggage checked through to any point on the route.  Parties

desiring to make only a part of the proposed tour, and thus save expense,

may stop over at any star they choose and wait for the return voyage.



After visiting all the most celebrated stars and constellations in our

system and personally, inspecting the remotest sparks that even the most

powerful telescope can now detect in the firmament, we shall proceed with

good heart upon





                           A STUPENDOUS VOYAGE



of discovery among the countless whirling worlds that make turmoil in the

mighty wastes of space that stretch their solemn solitudes, their

unimaginable vastness billions upon billions of miles away beyond the

farthest verge of telescopic vision, till by comparison the little

sparkling vault we used to gaze at on Earth shall seem like a remembered

phosphorescent flash of spangles which some tropical voyager's prow

stirred into life for a single instant, and which ten thousand miles of

phosphorescent seas and tedious lapse of time had since diminished to an

incident utterly trivial in his recollection.  Children occupying seats

at the first table will be charged full fare.





                             FIRST-CLASS FARE



from the Earth to Uranus, including visits to the Sun and Moon and all

the principal planets on the route, will be charged at the low rate of

$2 for every 50,000,000 miles of actual travel.  A great reduction will

be made where parties wish to make the round trip.  This comet is new and

in thorough repair and is now on her first voyage.  She is confessedly

the fastest on the line.  She makes 20,000,000 miles a day, with her

present facilities; but, with a picked American crew and good weather,

we are confident we can get 40,000,000 out of her.  Still, we shall never

push her to a dangerous speed, and we shall rigidly prohibit racing with

other comets.  Passengers desiring to diverge at any point or return will

be transferred to other comets.  We make close connections at all

principal points with all reliable lines.  Safety can be depended upon.

It is not to be denied that the heavens are infested with





                          OLD RAMSHACKLE COMETS



that have not been inspected or overhauled in 10,000 years, and which

ought long ago to have been destroyed or turned into hail-barges, but

with these we have no connection whatever.  Steerage passengers not

allowed abaft the main hatch.



Complimentary round-trip tickets have been tendered to General Butler,

Mr. Shepherd, Mr. Richardson, and other eminent gentlemen, whose public

services have entitled them to the rest and relaxation of a voyage of

this kind.  Parties desiring to make the round trip will have extra

accommodation.  The entire voyage will be completed, and the passengers

landed in New York again, on the 14th of December, 1991.  This is, at

least, forty years quicker than any other comet can do it in.  Nearly all

the back-pay members contemplate making the round trip with us in case

their constituents will allow them a holiday.  Every harmless amusement

will be allowed on board, but no pools permitted on the run of the comet

--no gambling of any kind.  All fixed stars will be respected by us, but

such stars as seem, to need fixing we shall fix.  If it makes trouble, we

shall be sorry, but firm.



Mr. Coggia having leased his comet to us, she will no longer be called by

his name, but by my partner's.  N. B.--Passengers by paying double fare

will be entitled to a share in all the new stars, suns, moons, comets,

meteors, and magazines of thunder and lightning we may discover.

Patent-medicine people will take notice that





                         WE CARRY BULLETIN-BOARDS



and a paint-brush along for use in the constellations, and are open to

terms.  Cremationists are reminded that we are going straight to--some

hot places--and are open to terms.  To other parties our enterprise is a

pleasure excursion, but individually we mean business.  We shall fly our

comet for all it is worth.





                         FOR FURTHER PARTICULARS,



or for freight or passage, apply on board, or to my partner, but not to

me, since I do not take charge of the comet until she is under way.

It is necessary, at a time like this, that my mind should not be burdened

with small business details.



                                                       MARK TWAIN.













RUNNING FOR GOVERNOR--[Written about 1870.]



A few months ago I was nominated for Governor of the great state of New

York, to run against Mr. John T. Smith and Mr. Blank J. Blank on an

independent ticket.  I somehow felt that I had one prominent advantage

over these gentlemen, and that was--good character.  It was easy to see

by the newspapers that if ever they had known what it was to bear a good

name, that time had gone by.  It was plain that in these latter years

they had become familiar with all manner of shameful crimes.  But at the

very moment that I was exalting my advantage and joying in it in secret,

there was a muddy undercurrent of discomfort "riling" the deeps of my

happiness, and that was--the having to hear my name bandied about in

familiar connection with those of such people.  I grew more and more

disturbed.  Finally I wrote my grandmother about it.  Her answer came

quick and sharp.  She said:



     You have never done one single thing in all your life to be ashamed

     of--not one.  Look at the newspapers--look at them and comprehend

     what sort of characters Messrs.  Smith and Blank are, and then see

     if you are willing to lower yourself to their level and enter a

     public canvass with them.



It was my very thought!  I did not sleep a single moment that night.

But, after all, I could not recede.



I was fully committed, and must go on with the fight.  As I was looking

listlessly over the papers at breakfast I came across this paragraph,

and I may truly say I never was so confounded before.



     PERJURY.--Perhaps, now that Mr. Mark Twain is before the people as a

     candidate for Governor, he will condescend to explain how he came to

     be convicted of perjury by thirty-four witnesses in Wakawak, Cochin

     China, in 1863, the intent of which perjury being to rob a poor

     native widow and her helpless family of a meager plantain-patch,

     their only stay and support in their bereavement and desolation.

     Mr. Twain owes it to himself, as well as to the great people whose

     suffrages he asks, to clear this matter up.  Will he do it?



I thought I should burst with amazement!  Such a cruel, heartless charge!

I never had seen Cochin China!  I never had heard of Wakawak!  I didn't

know a plantain-patch from a kangaroo!  I did not know what to do.  I was

crazed and helpless.  I let the day slip away without doing anything at

all.  The next morning the same paper had this--nothing more:



     SIGNIFICANT.--Mr.  Twain, it will be observed, is suggestively

     silent about the Cochin China perjury.



[Mem.--During the rest of the campaign this paper never referred to me in

any other way than as "the infamous perjurer Twain."]



Next came the Gazette, with this:



     WANTED TO KNOW.--Will the new candidate for Governor deign to

     explain to certain of his fellow-citizens (who are suffering to vote

     for him!) the little circumstance of his cabin-mates in Montana

     losing small valuables from time to time, until at last, these

     things having been invariably found on Mr. Twain's person or in his

     "trunk" (newspaper he rolled his traps in), they felt compelled to

     give him a friendly admonition for his own good, and so tarred and

     feathered him, and rode him on a rail; and then advised him to leave

     a permanent vacuum in the place he usually occupied in the camp.

     Will he do this?



Could anything be more deliberately malicious than that?  For I never was

in Montana in my life.



[After this, this journal customarily spoke of me as, "Twain, the Montana

Thief."]



I got to picking up papers apprehensively--much as one would lift a

desired blanket which he had some idea might have a rattlesnake under it.

One day this met my eye:



     THE LIE NAILED.--By the sworn affidavits of Michael O'Flanagan,

     Esq., of the Five Points, and Mr. Snub Rafferty and Mr. Catty

     Mulligan, of Water Street, it is established that Mr. Mark Twain's

     vile statement that the lamented grandfather of our noble

     standard-bearer, Blank J. Blank, was hanged for highway robbery, is

     a brutal and gratuitous LIE, without a shadow of foundation in fact.

     It is disheartening to virtuous men to see such shameful means

     resorted to to achieve political success as the attacking of the

     dead in their graves, and defiling their honored names with slander.

     When we think of the anguish this miserable falsehood must cause the

     innocent relatives and friends of the deceased, we are almost driven

     to incite an outraged and insulted public to summary and unlawful

     vengeance upon the traducer.  But no! let us leave him to the agony

     of a lacerated conscience (though if passion should get the better

     of the public, and in its blind fury they should do the traducer

     bodily injury, it is but too obvious that no jury could convict and

     no court punish the perpetrators of the deed).



The ingenious closing sentence had the effect of moving me out of bed

with despatch that night, and out at the back door also, while the

"outraged and insulted public" surged in the front way, breaking

furniture and windows in their righteous indignation as they came,

and taking off such property as they could carry when they went.

And yet I can lay my hand upon the Book and say that I never slandered

Mr. Blank's grandfather.  More: I had never even heard of him or

mentioned him up to that day and date.



[I will state, in passing, that the journal above quoted from always

referred to me afterward as "Twain, the Body-Snatcher."]



The next newspaper article that attracted my attention was the following:



     A SWEET CANDIDATE.--Mr.  Mark Twain, who was to make such a

     blighting speech at the mass-meeting of the Independents last night,

     didn't come to time!  A telegram from his physician stated that he

     had been knocked down by a runaway team, and his leg broken in two

     places--sufferer lying in great agony, and so forth, and so forth,

     and a lot more bosh of the same sort.  And the Independents tried

     hard to swallow the wretched subterfuge, and pretend that they did

     not know what was the real reason of the absence of the abandoned

     creature whom they denominate their standard-bearer.  A certain man

     was seen to reel into Mr.  Twain's hotel last night in a state of

     beastly intoxication.  It is the imperative duty of the Independents

     to prove that this besotted brute was not Mark Twain himself.  We

     have them at last!  This is a case that admits of no shirking.  The

     voice of the people demands in thunder tones, "WHO WAS THAT MAN?"



It was incredible, absolutely incredible, for a moment, that it was

really my name that was coupled with this disgraceful suspicion.  Three

long years had passed over my head since I had tasted ale, beer, wine or

liquor or any kind.



[It shows what effect the times were having on me when I say that I saw

myself, confidently dubbed "Mr. Delirium Tremens Twain" in the next issue

of that journal without a pang--notwithstanding I knew that with

monotonous fidelity the paper would go on calling me so to the very end.]



By this time anonymous letters were getting to be an important part of my

mail matter.  This form was common:



     How about that old woman you kiked of your premises which

     was beging.                             POL. PRY.



And this:



     There is things which you Have done which is unbeknowens to anybody

     but me.  You better trot out a few dots, to yours truly, or you'll

     hear through the papers from

                                             HANDY ANDY.



This is about the idea.  I could continue them till the reader was

surfeited, if desirable.



Shortly the principal Republican journal "convicted" me of wholesale

bribery, and the leading Democratic paper "nailed" an aggravated case of

blackmailing to me.



[In this way I acquired two additional names: "Twain the Filthy

Corruptionist" and "Twain the Loathsome Embracer."]



By this time there had grown to be such a clamor for an "answer" to all

the dreadful charges that were laid to me that the editors and leaders of

my party said it would be political ruin for me to remain silent any

longer.   As if to make their appeal the more imperative, the following

appeared in one of the papers the very next day:



     BEHOLD THE MAN!--The independent candidate still maintains silence.

     Because he dare not speak.  Every accusation against him has been

     amply proved, and they have been indorsed and reindorsed by his own

     eloquent silence, till at this day he stands forever convicted.

     Look upon your candidate, Independents!  Look upon the Infamous

     Perjurer! the Montana Thief! the Body-Snatcher!  Contemplate your

     incarnate Delirium Tremens! your Filthy Corruptionist! your

     Loathsome Embracer!  Gaze upon him--ponder him well--and then say if

     you can give your honest votes to a creature who has earned this

     dismal array of titles by his hideous crimes, and dares not open his

     mouth in denial of any one of them!



There was no possible way of getting out of it, and so, in deep

humiliation, I set about preparing to "answer" a mass of baseless charges

and mean and wicked falsehoods.  But I never finished the task, for the

very next morning a paper came out with a new horror, a fresh malignity,

and seriously charged me with burning a lunatic asylum with all its

inmates, because it obstructed the view from my house.  This threw me

into a sort of panic.  Then came the charge of poisoning my uncle to get

his property, with an imperative demand that the grave should be opened.

This drove me to the verge of distraction.  On top of this I was accused

of employing toothless and incompetent old relatives to prepare the food

for the foundling' hospital when I warden.  I was wavering--wavering.

And at last, as a due and fitting climax to the shameless persecution

that party rancor had inflicted upon me, nine little toddling children,

of all shades of color and degrees of raggedness, were taught to rush

onto the platform at a public meeting, and clasp me around the legs and

call me PA!



I gave it up.  I hauled down my colors and surrendered.  I was not equal

to the requirements of a Gubernatorial campaign in the state of New York,

and so I sent in my withdrawal from the candidacy, and in bitterness of

spirit signed it, "Truly yours, once a decent man, but now



                    "MARK TWAIN, LP., M.T., B.S., D.T., F.C., and L.E."













A MYSTERIOUS VISIT





The first notice that was taken of me when I "settled down" recently was

by a gentleman who said he was an assessor, and connected with the U. S.

Internal Revenue Department.  I said I had never heard of his branch of

business before, but I was very glad to see him all the same.  Would he

sit down?  He sat down.  I did not know anything particular to say, and

yet I felt that people who have arrived at the dignity of keeping house

must be conversational, must be easy and sociable in company.  So, in

default of anything else to say, I asked him if he was opening his shop

in our neighborhood.



He said he was.  [I did not wish to appear ignorant, but I had hoped he

would mention what he had for sale.]



I ventured to ask him "How was trade?"  And he said "So-so."



I then said we would drop in, and if we liked his house as well as any

other, we would give him our custom.



He said he thought we would like his establishment well enough to confine

ourselves to it--said he never saw anybody who would go off and hunt up

another man in his line after trading with him once.



That sounded pretty complacent, but barring that natural expression of

villainy which we all have, the man looked honest enough.



I do not know how it came about exactly, but gradually we appeared to

melt down and run together, conversationally speaking, and then

everything went along as comfortably as clockwork.



We talked, and talked, and talked--at least I did; and we laughed, and

laughed, and laughed--at least he did.  But all the time I had my

presence of mind about me--I had my native shrewdness turned on "full

head," as the engineers say.  I was determined to find out all about his

business in spite of his obscure answers--and I was determined I would

have it out of him without his suspecting what I was at.  I meant to trap

him with a deep, deep ruse.  I would tell him all about my own business,

and he would naturally so warm to me during this seductive burst of

confidence that he would forget himself, and tell me all about his

affairs before he suspected what I was about.  I thought to myself, My

son, you little know what an old fox you are dealing with.  I said:



"Now you never would guess what I made lecturing this winter and last

spring?"



"No--don't believe I could, to save me.  Let me see--let me see.   About

two thousand dollars, maybe?  But no; no, sir, I know you couldn't have

made that much.   Say seventeen hundred, maybe?"



"Ha! ha!  I knew you couldn't.  My lecturing receipts for last spring and

this winter were fourteen thousand seven hundred and fifty dollars.  What

do you think of that?"



"Why, it is amazing-perfectly amazing.  I will make a note of it.  And

you say even this wasn't all?"



"All!  Why bless you, there was my income from the Daily Warwhoop for

four months--about--about--well, what should you say to about eight

thousand dollars, for instance?"



"Say!  Why, I should say I should like to see myself rolling in just such

another ocean of affluence.  Eight thousand!  I'll make a note of it.

Why man!--and on top of all this am I to understand that you had still

more income?"



"Ha! ha! ha!  Why, you're only in the suburbs of it, so to speak.

There's my book, The Innocents Abroad price $3.50 to $5, according to the

binding.  Listen to me.  Look me in the eye.  During the last four months

and a half, saying nothing of sales before that, but just simply during

the four months and a half, we've sold ninety-five thousand copies of

that book.  Ninety-five thousand!  Think of it.  Average four dollars a

copy, say.  It's nearly four hundred thousand dollars, my son.  I get

half."



"The suffering Moses!  I'll set that down.  Fourteen-seven-fifty

--eight--two hundred.  Total, say--well, upon my word, the grand total is

about two hundred and thirteen or fourteen thousand dollars!  Is that

possible?"



"Possible!  If there's any mistake it's the other way.  Two hundred and

fourteen thousand, cash, is my income for this year if I know how to

cipher."



Then the gentleman got up to go.  It came over me most uncomfortably that

maybe I had made my revelations for nothing, besides being flattered into

stretching them considerably by the stranger's astonished exclamations.

But no; at the last moment the gentleman handed me a large envelope, and

said it contained his advertisement; and that I would find out all about

his business in it; and that he would be happy to have my custom-would,

in fact, be proud to have the custom of a man of such prodigious income;

and that he used to think there were several wealthy men in the city, but

when they came to trade with him he discovered that they barely had

enough to live on; and that, in truth, it had been such a weary, weary

age since he had seen a rich man face to face, and talked to him, and

touched him with his hands, that he could hardly refrain from embracing

me--in fact, would esteem it a great favor if I would let him embrace me.



This so pleased me that I did not try to resist, but allowed this

simple-hearted stranger to throw his arms about me and weep a few

tranquilizing tears down the back of my neck.  Then he went his way.



As soon as he was gone I opened his advertisement.  I studied it

attentively for four minutes.  I then called up the cook, and said:



"Hold me while I faint!  Let Marie turn the griddle-cakes."



By and by, when I came to, I sent down to the rum-mill on the corner and

hired an artist by the week to sit up nights and curse that stranger, and

give me a lift occasionally in the daytime when I came to a hard place.



Ah, what a miscreant he was!  His "advertisement"  was nothing in the

world but a wicked tax-return--a string of impertinent questions about

my private affairs, occupying the best part of four fools-cap pages of

fine print-questions, I may remark, gotten up with such marvelous

ingenuity that the oldest man in the world couldn't understand what the

most of them were driving at--questions, too, that were calculated to

make a man report about four times his actual income to keep from

swearing to a falsehood.  I looked for a loophole, but there did not

appear to be any.  Inquiry No. 1 covered my case as generously and as

amply as an umbrella could cover an ant-hill:



     What were your profits, during the past year, from any trade,

     business, or vocation, wherever carried on?



And that inquiry was backed up by thirteen others of an equally searching

nature, the most modest of which required information as to whether I had

committed any burglary or highway robbery, or, by any arson or other

secret source of emolument had acquired property which was not enumerated

in my statement of income as set opposite to inquiry No. 1.



It was plain that that stranger had enabled me to make a goose of myself.

It was very, very plain; and so I went out and hired another artist.

By working on my vanity, the stranger had seduced me into declaring an

income of two hundred and fourteen thousand dollars.  By law, one

thousand dollars of this was exempt from income tax--the only relief I

could see, and it was only a drop in the ocean.  At the legal five per

cent., I must pay to the government the sum of ten thousand six hundred

and fifty dollars, income tax!



[I may remark, in this place, that I did not do it.]



I am acquainted with a very opulent man, whose house is a palace, whose

table is regal, whose outlays are enormous, yet a man who has no income,

as I have often noticed by the revenue returns; and to him I went for

advice in my distress.  He took my dreadful exhibition of receipts, he

put on his glasses, he took his pen, and presto!--I was a pauper!  It was

the neatest thing that ever was.  He did it simply by deftly manipulating

the bill of "DEDUCTIONS."  He set down my "State, national, and municipal

taxes" at so much; my "losses by shipwreck; fire, etc.," at so much; my

"losses on sales of real estate"--on "live stock sold"--on "payments for

rent of homestead"--on "repairs, improvements, interest"--on "previously

taxed salary as an officer of the United States army, navy, revenue

service," and other things.  He got astonishing "deductions" out of each

and every one of these matters--each and every one of them.  And when he

was done he handed me the paper, and I saw at a glance that during the

year my income, in the way of profits, had been one thousand two hundred

and fifty dollars and forty cents.



"Now," said he, "the thousand dollars is exempt by law.  What you want to

do is to go and swear this document in and pay tax on the two hundred and

fifty dollars."



[While he was making this speech his little boy Willie lifted a

two-dollar greenback out of his vest pocket and vanished with it, and I

would wager; anything that if my stranger were to call on that little boy

to-morrow he would make a false return of his income.]



"Do you," said I, "do you always work up the 'deductions' after this

fashion in your own case, sir?"



"Well, I should say so!  If it weren't for those eleven saving clauses

under the head of 'Deductions' I should be beggared every year to support

this hateful and wicked, this extortionate and tyrannical government."



This gentleman stands away up among the very best of the solid men of the

city--the men of moral weight, of commercial integrity, of unimpeachable,

social spotlessness--and so I bowed to his example.  I went down to the

revenue office, and under the accusing eyes of my old visitor I stood up

and swore to lie after lie, fraud after fraud, villainy after villainy,

till my soul was coated inches and inches thick with perjury, and my

self-respect gone for ever and ever.



But what of it?  It is nothing more than thousands of the richest and

proudest, and most respected, honored, and courted men in America do

every year.  And so I don't care.  I am not ashamed.  I shall simply,

for the present, talk little and eschew fire-proof gloves, lest I fall

into certain dreadful habits irrevocably.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sketches New and Old, Complete

by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













CURIOUS REPUBLIC OF GONDOUR



by Mark Twain









THE CURIOUS REPUBLIC OF GONDOUR AND OTHER WHIMSICAL SKETCHES





NOTE:



Most of the sketches in this volume were taken from a series the author

wrote for The Galaxy from May, 1870, to April, 1871.  The rest appeared

in The Buffalo Express.







TABLE OF CONTENTS



THE CURIOUS REPUBLIC OF GONDOUR

A MEMORY

INTRODUCTORY TO "MEMORANDA".

ABOUT SMELLS

A COUPLE OF SAD EXPERIENCES

DAN MURPHY

THE "TOURNAMENT" IN A.D. 1870

CURIOUS RELIC FOR SALE

A REMINISCENCE OF THE BACK SETTLEMENTS

A ROYAL COMPLIMENT

THE APPROACHING EPIDEMIC

THE TONE-IMPARTING COMMITTEE

OUR PRECIOUS LUNATIC

THE EUROPEAN WAR

THE WILD MAN INTERVIEWED

LAST WORDS OF GREAT MEN











THE CURIOUS REPUBLIC OF GONDOUR



As soon as I had learned to speak the language a little, I became greatly

interested in the people and the system of government.



I found that the nation had at first tried universal suffrage pure and

simple, but had thrown that form aside because the result was not

satisfactory.  It had seemed to deliver all power into the hands of the

ignorant and non-tax-paying classes; and of a necessity the responsible

offices were filled from these classes also.



A remedy was sought.  The people believed they had found it; not in the

destruction of universal suffrage, but in the enlargement of it.  It was

an odd idea, and ingenious.  You must understand, the constitution gave

every man a vote; therefore that vote was a vested right, and could not

be taken away.  But the constitution did not say that certain individuals

might not be given two votes, or ten!  So an amendatory clause was

inserted in a quiet way; a clause which authorised the enlargement of the

suffrage in certain cases to be specified by statute.  To offer to

"limit" the suffrage might have made instant trouble; the offer to

"enlarge" it had a pleasant aspect.  But of course the newspapers soon

began to suspect; and then out they came!  It was found, however, that

for once--and for the first time in the history of the republic

--property, character, and intellect were able to wield a political

influence; for once, money, virtue, and intelligence took a vital and a

united interest in a political question; for once these powers went to

the "primaries" in strong force; for once the best men in the nation were

put forward as candidates for that parliament whose business it should be

to enlarge the suffrage.  The weightiest half of the press quickly joined

forces with the new movement, and left the other half to rail about the

proposed "destruction of the liberties" of the bottom layer of society,

the hitherto governing class of the community.



The victory was complete.  The new law was framed and passed.  Under it

every citizen, howsoever poor or ignorant, possessed one vote,

so universal suffrage still reigned; but if a man possessed a good

common-school education and no money, he had two votes; a high-school

education gave him four; if he had property like wise, to the value of

three thousand 'sacos,' he wielded one more vote; for every fifty

thousand 'sacos' a man added to his property, he was entitled to another

vote; a university education entitled a man to nine votes, even though he

owned no property.  Therefore, learning being more prevalent and more

easily acquired than riches, educated men became a wholesome check upon

wealthy men, since they could outvote them.  Learning goes usually with

uprightness, broad views, and humanity; so the learned voters, possessing

the balance of power, became the vigilant and efficient protectors of the

great lower rank of society.



And now a curious thing developed itself--a sort of emulation, whose

object was voting power!  Whereas formerly a man was honored only

according to the amount of money he possessed, his grandeur was measured

now by the number of votes he wielded.  A man with only one vote was

conspicuously respectful to his neighbor who possessed three.  And if he

was a man above the common-place, he was as conspicuously energetic in

his determination to acquire three for himself.  This spirit of emulation

invaded all ranks.  Votes based upon capital were commonly called

"mortal" votes, because they could be lost; those based upon learning

were called "immortal," because they were permanent, and because of their

customarily imperishable character they were naturally more valued than

the other sort.  I say "customarily" for the reason that these votes were

not absolutely imperishable, since insanity could suspend them.



Under this system, gambling and speculation almost ceased in the

republic.  A man honoured as the possessor of great voting power could

not afford to risk the loss of it upon a doubtful chance.



It was curious to observe the manners and customs which the enlargement

plan produced.  Walking the street with a friend one day he delivered a

careless bow to a passer-by, and then remarked that that person possessed

only one vote and would probably never earn another; he was more

respectful to the next acquaintance he met; he explained that this salute

was a four-vote bow.  I tried to "average" the importance of the people

he accosted after that, by the-nature of his bows, but my success was

only partial, because of the somewhat greater homage paid to the

immortals than to the mortals.  My friend explained.  He said there was

no law to regulate this thing, except that most powerful of all laws,

custom.  Custom had created these varying bows, and in time they had

become easy and natural.  At this moment he delivered himself of a very

profound salute, and then said, "Now there's a man who began life as a

shoemaker's apprentice, and without education; now he swings twenty-two

mortal votes and two immortal ones; he expects to pass a high-school

examination this year and climb a couple of votes higher among the

immortals; mighty valuable citizen."



By and by my friend met a venerable personage, and not only made him a

most elaborate bow, but also took off his hat.  I took off mine, too,

with a mysterious awe.  I was beginning to be infected.



"What grandee is that?"



"That is our most illustrious astronomer.  He hasn't any money, but is

fearfully learned.  Nine immortals is his political weight!  He would

swing a hundred and fifty votes if our system were perfect."



"Is there any altitude of mere moneyed grandeur that you take off your

hat to?"



"No.  Nine immortal votes is the only power we uncover for that is, in

civil life.  Very great officials receive that mark of homage, of

course."



It was common to hear people admiringly mention men who had begun life on

the lower levels and in time achieved great voting-power.  It was also

common to hear youths planning a future of ever so many votes for

themselves.  I heard shrewd mammas speak of certain young men as good

"catches" because they possessed such-and-such a number of votes.  I knew

of more than one case where an heiress was married to a youngster who had

but one vote; the argument being that he was gifted with such excellent

parts that in time he would acquire a good voting strength, and perhaps

in the long run be able to outvote his wife, if he had luck.



Competitive examinations were the rule and in all official grades.  I

remarked that the questions asked the candidates were wild, intricate,

and often required a sort of knowledge not needed in the office sought.



"Can a fool or an ignoramus answer them?" asked the person I was talking

with.



"Certainly not."



"Well, you will not find any fools or ignoramuses among our officials."



I felt rather cornered, but made shift to say:



"But these questions cover a good deal more ground than is necessary."



"No matter; if candidates can answer these it is tolerably fair evidence

that they can answer nearly any other question you choose to ask them."



There were some things in Gondour which one could not shut his eyes to.

One was, that ignorance and incompetence had no place in the government.

Brains and property managed the state.  A candidate for office must have

marked ability, education, and high character, or he stood no sort of

chance of election.  If a hod-carrier possessed these, he could succeed;

but the mere fact that he was a hod-carrier could not elect him, as in

previous times.



It was now a very great honour to be in the parliament or in office;

under the old system such distinction had only brought suspicion upon a

man and made him a helpless mark for newspaper contempt and scurrility.

Officials did not need to steal now, their salaries being vast in

comparison with the pittances paid in the days when parliaments were

created by hod-carriers, who viewed official salaries from a hod-carrying

point of view and compelled that view to be respected by their obsequious

servants.  Justice was wisely and rigidly administered; for a judge,

after once reaching his place through the specified line of promotions,

was a permanency during good behaviour.  He was not obliged to modify his

judgments according to the effect they might have upon the temper of a

reigning political party.



The country was mainly governed by a ministry which went out with the

administration that created it.  This was also the case with the chiefs

of the great departments.  Minor officials ascended to their several

positions through well-earned promotions, and not by a jump from

gin-mills or the needy families and friends of members of parliament.

Good behaviour measured their terms of office.



The head of the governments the Grand Caliph, was elected for a term of

twenty years.  I questioned the wisdom of this.  I was answered that he

could do no harm, since the ministry and the parliament governed the

land, and he was liable to impeachment for misconduct.  This great office

had twice been ably filled by women, women as aptly fitted for it as some

of the sceptred queens of history.  Members of the cabinet, under many

administrations, had been women.



I found that the pardoning power was lodged in a court of pardons,

consisting of several great judges.  Under the old regime, this important

power was vested in a single official, and he usually took care to have a

general jail delivery in time for the next election.



I inquired about public schools.  There were plenty of them, and of free

colleges too.  I inquired about compulsory education.  This was received

with a smile, and the remark:



"When a man's child is able to make himself powerful and honoured

according to the amount of education he acquires, don't you suppose that

that parent will apply the compulsion himself?  Our free schools and free

colleges require no law to fill them."



There was a loving pride of country about this person's way of speaking

which annoyed me.  I had long been unused to the sound of it in my own.

The Gondour national airs were forever dinning in my ears; therefore I

was glad to leave that country and come back to my dear native land,

where one never hears that sort of music.













A MEMORY,



When I say that I never knew my austere father to be enamoured of but one

poem in all the long half century that he lived, persons who knew him

will easily believe me; when I say that I have never composed but one

poem in all the long third of a century that I have lived, persons who

know me will be sincerely grateful; and finally, when I say that the poem

which I composed was not the one which my father was enamoured of,

persons who may have known us both will not need to have this truth shot

into them with a mountain howitzer before they can receive it.  My father

and I were always on the most distant terms when I was a boy--a sort of

armed neutrality so to speak.  At irregular intervals this neutrality was

broken, and suffering ensued; but I will be candid enough to say that the

breaking and the suffering were always divided up with strict

impartiality between us--which is to say, my father did the breaking, and

I did the suffering.  As a general thing I was a backward, cautious,

unadventurous boy; but I once jumped off a two-story table; another time

I gave an elephant a "plug" of tobacco and retired without waiting for an

answer; and still another time I pretended to be talking in my sleep, and

got off a portion of a very wretched original conundrum in the hearing of

my father.  Let us not pry into the result; it was of no consequence to

any one but me.



But the poem I have referred to as attracting my father's attention and

achieving his favour was "Hiawatha."  Some man who courted a sudden and

awful death presented him an early copy, and I never lost faith in my own

senses until I saw him sit down and go to reading it in cold blood--saw

him open the book, and heard him read these following lines, with the

same inflectionless judicial frigidity with which he always read his

charge to the jury, or administered an oath to a witness:



                   "Take your bow,

                    O Hiawatha,

                    Take your arrows, jasper-headed,

                    Take your war-club, Puggawaugun,

                    And your mittens, Minjekahwan,

                    And your birch canoe for sailing,

                    And the oil of Mishe-Nama."



Presently my father took out of his breast pocket an imposing "Warranty

Deed," and fixed his eyes upon it and dropped into meditation.  I knew

what it was.  A Texan lady and gentleman had given my half-brother, Orrin

Johnson, a handsome property in a town in the North, in gratitude to him

for having saved their lives by an act of brilliant heroism.



By and by my father looked towards me and sighed.  Then he said:



"If I had such a son as this poet, here were a subject worthier than the

traditions of these Indians."



"If you please, sir, where?"



"In this deed."



"Yes--in this very deed," said my father, throwing it on the table.

"There is more poetry, more romance, more sublimity, more splendid

imagery hidden away in that homely document than could be found in all

the traditions of all the savages that live."



"Indeed, sir?  Could I--could I get it out, sir?  Could I compose the

poem, sir, do you think?"



"You?"



I wilted.



Presently my father's face softened somewhat, and he said:



"Go and try.  But mind, curb folly.  No poetry at the expense of truth.

Keep strictly to the facts."



I said I would, and bowed myself out, and went upstairs.



"Hiawatha" kept droning in my head--and so did my father's remarks about

the sublimity and romance hidden in my subject, and also his injunction

to beware of wasteful and exuberant fancy.  I noticed, just here, that I

had heedlessly brought the deed away with me; now at this moment came to

me one of those rare moods of daring recklessness, such as I referred to

a while ago.  Without another thought, and in plain defiance of the fact

that I knew my father meant me to write the romantic story of my

half-brother's adventure and subsequent good fortune, I ventured to heed

merely the letter of his remarks and ignore their spirit.  I took the

stupid "Warranty Deed" itself and chopped it up into Hiawathian blank

verse without altering or leaving out three words, and without

transposing six.  It required loads of courage to go downstairs and face

my father with my performance.  I started three or four times before I

finally got my pluck to where it would stick.  But at last I said I would

go down and read it to him if he threw me over the church for it.

I stood up to begin, and he told me to come closer.  I edged up a little,

but still left as much neutral ground between us as I thought he would

stand.  Then I began.  It would be useless for me to try to tell what

conflicting emotions expressed themselves upon his face, nor how they

grew more and more intense, as I proceeded; nor how a fell darkness

descended upon his countenance, and he began to gag and swallow, and his

hands began to work and twitch, as I reeled off line after line, with the

strength ebbing out of me, and my legs trembling under me:



                    THE STORY OF A GALLANT DEED



                    THIS INDENTURE, made the tenth

                    Day of November, in the year

                    Of our Lord one thousand eight

                    Hundred six-and-fifty,



                    Between Joanna S. E. Gray

                    And Philip Gray, her husband,

                    Of Salem City in the State

                    Of Texas, of the first part,



                    And O. B. Johnson, of the town

                    Of Austin, ditto, WITNESSETH:

                    That said party of first part,

                    For and in consideration



                    Of the sum of Twenty Thousand

                    Dollars, lawful money of

                    The U. S.  of Americay,

                    To them in hand now paid by said



                    Party of the second part,

                    The due receipt whereof is here--

                    By confessed and acknowledg-ed

                    Having Granted, Bargained, Sold, Remised,



                    Released and Aliened and Conveyed,

                    Confirmed, and by these presents do

                    Grant and Bargain, Sell, Remise,

                    Alien, Release, Convey, and Con--



                    Firm unto the said aforesaid

                    Party of the second part,

                    And to his heirs and assigns

                    Forever and ever ALL



                    That certain lot or parcel of

                    LAND situate in city of

                    Dunkirk, County of Chautauqua,

                    And likewise furthermore in York State



                    Bounded and described, to-wit,

                    As follows, herein, namely

                    BEGINNING at the distance of

                    A hundred two-and-forty feet,



                    North-half-east, north-east-by north,

                    East-north-east and northerly

                    Of the northerly line of Mulligan street

                    On the westerly line of Brannigan street,



                    And running thence due northerly

                    On Brannigan street 200 feet,

                    Thence at right angles westerly,

                    North-west-by-west-and-west-half-west,



                    West-and-by-north, north-west-by-west,

                    About--



I kind of dodged, and the boot-jack broke the looking-glass.  I could

have waited to see what became of the other missiles if I had wanted to,

but I took no interest in such things.













INTRODUCTORY TO "MEMORANDA"



In taking upon myself the burden of editing a department in THE GALAXY

magazine, I have been actuated by a conviction that I was needed, almost

imperatively, in this particular field of literature.  I have long felt

that while the magazine literature of the day had much to recommend it,

it yet lacked stability, solidity, weight.  It seemed plain to me that

too much space was given to poetry and romance, and not enough to

statistics and agriculture.  This defect it shall be my earnest endeavour

to remedy.  If I succeed, the simple consciousness that I have done a

good deed will be a sufficient reward.**--[**Together with salary.]



In this department of mine the public may always rely upon finding

exhaustive statistical tables concerning the finances of the country,

the ratio of births and deaths; the percentage of increase of population,

etc., etc.--in a word, everything in the realm of statistics that can

make existence bright and beautiful.



Also, in my department will always be found elaborate condensations of

the Patent Office Reports, wherein a faithful endeavour will at all times

be made to strip the nutritious facts bare of that effulgence of

imagination and sublimity of diction which too often mar the excellence

of those great works.**--[** N. B.--No other magazine in the country

makes a specialty of the Patent Office Reports.]



In my department will always be found ample excerpts from those able

dissertations upon Political Economy which I have for a long time been

contributing to a great metropolitan journal, and which, for reasons

utterly incomprehensible to me, another party has chosen to usurp the

credit of composing.



And, finally, I call attention with pride to the fact that in my

department of the magazine the farmer will always find full market

reports, and also complete instructions about farming, even from the

grafting of the seed to the harrowing of the matured crop.  I shall throw

a pathos into the subject of Agriculture that will surprise and delight

the world.



Such is my programme; and I am persuaded that by adhering to it with

fidelity I shall succeed in materially changing the character of this

magazine.  Therefore I am emboldened to ask the assistance and

encouragement of all whose sympathies are with Progress and Reform.



In the other departments of the magazine will be found poetry, tales, and

other frothy trifles, and to these the reader can turn for relaxation

from time to time, and thus guard against overstraining the powers of his

mind.

                                                  M. T.



P. S.--1.  I have not sold out of the "Buffalo Express," and shall not;

neither shall I stop writing for it.  This remark seems necessary in a

business point of view.



2.  These MEMORANDA are not a "humorous" department.  I would not conduct

an exclusively and professedly humorous department for any one.  I would

always prefer to have the privilege of printing a serious and sensible

remark, in case one occurred to me, without the reader's feeling obliged

to consider himself outraged.  We cannot keep the same mood day after

day.  I am liable, some day, to want to print my opinion on

jurisprudence, or Homeric poetry, or international law, and I shall do

it.  It will be of small consequence to me whether the reader survive or

not.  I shall never go straining after jokes when in a cheerless mood, so

long as the unhackneyed subject of international law is open to me.

I will leave all that straining to people who edit professedly and

inexorably "humorous" departments and publications.



3.  I have chosen the general title of MEMORANDA for this department

because it is plain and simple, and makes no fraudulent promises.  I can

print under it statistics, hotel arrivals, or anything that comes handy,

without violating faith with the reader.



4.  Puns cannot be allowed a place in this department.  Inoffensive

ignorance, benignant stupidity, and unostentatious imbecility will always

be welcomed and cheerfully accorded a corner, and even the feeblest

humour will be admitted, when we can do no better; but no circumstances,

however dismal, will ever be considered a sufficient excuse for the

admission of that last--and saddest evidence of intellectual poverty, the

Pun.













ABOUT SMELLS



In a recent issue of the "Independent," the Rev. T. De Witt Talmage, of

Brooklyn, has the following utterance on the subject of "Smells":



     I have a good Christian friend who, if he sat in the front pew in

     church, and a working man should enter the door at the other end,

     would smell him instantly.  My friend is not to blame for the

     sensitiveness of his nose, any more than you would flog a pointer

     for being keener on the scent than a stupid watch dog.  The fact is,

     if you, had all the churches free, by reason of the mixing up of the

     common people with the uncommon, you would keep one-half of

     Christendom sick at their stomach.  If you are going to kill the

     church thus with bad smells, I will have nothing to do with this

     work of evangelization.



We have reason to believe that there will be labouring men in heaven; and

also a number of negroes, and Esquimaux, and Terra del Fuegans, and

Arabs, and a few Indians, and possibly even some Spaniards and

Portuguese.  All things are possible with God.  We shall have all these

sorts of people in heaven; but, alas! in getting them we shall lose the

society of Dr. Talmage.  Which is to say, we shall lose the company of

one who could give more real "tone" to celestial society than any other

contribution Brooklyn could furnish.  And what would eternal happiness be

without the Doctor?  Blissful, unquestionably--we know that well enough

but would it be 'distingue,' would it be 'recherche' without him?  St.

Matthew without stockings or sandals; St. Jerome bare headed, and with a

coarse brown blanket robe dragging the ground; St. Sebastian with

scarcely any raiment at all--these we should see, and should enjoy seeing

them; but would we not miss a spike-tailed coat and kids, and turn away

regretfully, and say to parties from the Orient: "These are well enough,

but you ought to see Talmage of Brooklyn."  I fear me that in the better

world we shall not even have Dr. Talmage's "good Christian friend."



For if he were sitting under the glory of the Throne, and the keeper of

the keys admitted a Benjamin Franklin or other labouring man, that

"friend," with his fine natural powers infinitely augmented by

emancipation from hampering flesh, would detect him with a single sniff,

and immediately take his hat and ask to be excused.



To all outward seeming, the Rev. T. De Witt Talmage is of the same

material as that used in the construction of his early predecessors in

the ministry; and yet one feels that there must be a difference somewhere

between him and the Saviour's first disciples.  It may be because here,

in the nineteenth century, Dr. T.  has had advantages which Paul and

Peter and the others could not and did not have.  There was a lack of

polish about them, and a looseness of etiquette, and a want of

exclusiveness, which one cannot help noticing.  They healed the very

beggars, and held intercourse with people of a villainous odour every

day.  If the subject of these remarks had been chosen among the original

Twelve Apostles, he would not have associated with the rest, because he

could not have stood the fishy smell of some of his comrades who came

from around the Sea of Galilee.  He would have resigned his commission

with some such remark as he makes in the extract quoted above: "Master,

if thou art going to kill the church thus with bad smells, I will have

nothing to do with this work of evangelization."  He is a disciple, and

makes that remark to the Master; the only difference is, that he makes it

in the nineteenth instead of the first century.



Is there a choir in Mr. T.'s church?  And does it ever occur that they

have no better manners than to sing that hymn which is so suggestive of

labourers and mechanics:



          "Son of the Carpenter! receive

          This humble work of mine?"



Now, can it be possible that in a handful of centuries the Christian

character has fallen away from an imposing heroism that scorned even the

stake, the cross, and the axe, to a poor little effeminacy that withers

and wilts under an unsavoury smell?  We are not prepared to believe so,

the reverend Doctor and his friend to the contrary notwithstanding.













A COUPLE OF SAD EXPERIENCES



When I published a squib recently in which I said I was going to edit an

Agricultural Department in this magazine, I certainly did not desire to

deceive anybody.  I had not the remotest desire to play upon any one's

confidence with a practical joke, for he is a pitiful creature indeed who

will degrade the dignity of his humanity to the contriving of the witless

inventions that go by that name.  I purposely wrote the thing as absurdly

and as extravagantly as it could be written, in order to be sure and not

mislead hurried or heedless readers: for I spoke of launching a triumphal

barge upon a desert, and planting a tree of prosperity in a mine--a tree

whose fragrance should slake the thirst of the naked, and whose branches

should spread abroad till they washed the chorea of, etc., etc.  I

thought that manifest lunacy like that would protect the reader.  But to

make assurance absolute, and show that I did not and could not seriously

mean to attempt an Agricultural Department, I stated distinctly in my

postscript that I did not know anything about Agriculture.  But alas!

right there is where I made my worst mistake--for that remark seems to

have recommended my proposed Agriculture more than anything else.  It

lets a little light in on me, and I fancy I perceive that the farmers

feel a little bored, sometimes, by the oracular profundity of

agricultural editors who "know it all."  In fact, one of my

correspondents suggests this (for that unhappy squib has deluged me with

letters about potatoes, and cabbages, and hominy, and vermicelli, and

maccaroni, and all the other fruits, cereals, and vegetables that ever

grew on earth; and if I get done answering questions about the best way

of raising these things before I go raving crazy, I shall be thankful,

and shall never write obscurely for fun any more).



Shall I tell the real reason why I have unintentionally succeeded in

fooling so many people?  It is because some of them only read a little of

the squib I wrote and jumped to the conclusion that it was serious, and

the rest did not read it at all, but heard of my agricultural venture at

second-hand.  Those cases I could not guard against, of course.  To write

a burlesque so wild that its pretended facts will not be accepted in

perfect good faith by somebody, is, very nearly an impossible thing to

do.  It is because, in some instances, the reader is a person who never

tries to deceive anybody himself, and therefore is not expecting any one

to wantonly practise a deception upon him; and in this case the only

person dishonoured is the man who wrote the burlesque.  In other

instances the "nub" or moral of the burlesque--if its object be to

enforce a truth--escapes notice in the superior glare of something in the

body of the burlesque itself.  And very often this "moral" is tagged on

at the bottom, and the reader, not knowing that it is the key of the

whole thing and the only important paragraph in the article, tranquilly

turns up his nose at it and leaves it unread.  One can deliver a satire

with telling force through the insidious medium of a travesty, if he is

careful not to overwhelm the satire with the extraneous interest of the

travesty, and so bury it from the reader's sight and leave him a joked

and defrauded victim, when the honest intent was to add to either his

knowledge or his wisdom.  I have had a deal of experience in burlesques

and their unfortunate aptness to deceive the public, and this is why I

tried hard to make that agricultural one so broad and so perfectly

palpable that even a one-eyed potato could see it; and yet, as I speak

the solemn truth, it fooled one of the ablest agricultural editors in

America!













DAN MURPHY



One of the saddest things that ever came under my notice (said the

banker's clerk) was there in Corning, during the war.  Dan Murphy

enlisted as a private, and fought very bravely.  The boys all liked him,

and when a wound by and by weakened him down till carrying a musket was

too heavy work for him, they clubbed together and fixed him up as a

sutler.  He made money then, and sent it always to his wife to bank for

him.  She was a washer and ironer, and knew enough by hard experience to

keep money when she got it.  She didn't waste a penny.  On the contrary,

she began to get miserly as her bank account grew.  She grieved to part

with a cent, poor creature, for twice in her hard-working life she had

known what it was to be hungry, cold, friendless, sick, and without a

dollar in the world, and she had a haunting dread of suffering so again.

Well, at last Dan died; and the boys, in testimony of their esteem and

respect for him, telegraphed to Mrs.  Murphy to know if she would like to

have him embalmed and sent home, when you know the usual custom was to

dump a poor devil like him into a shallow hole, and then inform his

friends what had become of him.  Mrs.  Murphy jumped to the conclusion

that it would only cost two or three dollars to embalm her dead husband,

and so she telegraphed "Yes."  It was at the "wake" that the bill for

embalming arrived and was presented to the widow.  She uttered a wild,

sad wail, that pierced every heart, and said: "Sivinty-foive dollars for

stoofhn' Dan, blister their sowls!  Did thim divils suppose I was goin'

to stairt a Museim, that I'd be dalin' in such expinsive curiassities!"



The banker's clerk said there was not a dry eye in the house.













THE "TOURNAMENT" IN A. D. 1870



Lately there appeared an item to this effect, and the same went the

customary universal round of the press:



     A telegraph station has just been established upon the traditional

     site of the Garden of Eden.



As a companion to that, nothing fits so aptly and so perfectly as this:



     Brooklyn has revived the knightly tournament of the Middle Ages.



It is hard to tell which is the most startling, the idea of that highest

achievement of human genius and intelligence, the telegraph, prating away

about the practical concerns of the world's daily life in the heart and

home of ancient indolence, ignorance, and savagery, or the idea of that

happiest expression of the brag, vanity, and mock-heroics of our

ancestors, the "tournament," coming out of its grave to flaunt its tinsel

trumpery and perform its "chivalrous" absurdities in the high noon of the

nineteenth century, and under the patronage of a great, broad-awake city

and an advanced civilisation.



A "tournament" in Lynchburg is a thing easily within the comprehension of

the average mind; but no commonly gifted person can conceive of such a

spectacle in Brooklyn without straining his powers.  Brooklyn is part and

parcel of the city of New York, and there is hardly romance enough in the

entire metropolis to re-supply a Virginia "knight" with "chivalry," in

case he happened to run out of it.  Let the reader calmly and

dispassionately picture to himself "lists" in Brooklyn; heralds,

pursuivants, pages, garter king-at-arms--in Brooklyn; the marshalling of

the fantastic hosts of "chivalry" in slashed doublets, velvet trunks,

ruffles, and plumes--in Brooklyn; mounted on omnibus and livery-stable

patriarchs, promoted, and referred to in cold blood as "steeds,"

"destriers," and "chargers," and divested of their friendly, humble names

these meek old "Jims" and "Bobs" and "Charleys," and renamed "Mohammed,"

"Bucephalus," and "Saladin"--in Brooklyn; mounted thus, and armed with

swords and shields and wooden lances, and cased in paste board hauberks,

morions, greaves, and gauntlets, and addressed as "Sir" Smith, and "Sir"

Jones, and bearing such titled grandeurs as "The Disinherited Knight,"

the "Knight of Shenandoah," the "Knight of the Blue Ridge," the "Knight

of Maryland," and the "Knight of the Secret Sorrow"--in Brooklyn; and at

the toot of the horn charging fiercely upon a helpless ring hung on a

post, and prodding at it in trepidly with their wooden sticks, and by and

by skewering it and cavorting back to the judges' stand covered with

glory this in Brooklyn; and each noble success like this duly and

promptly announced by an applauding toot from the herald's horn, and "the

band playing three bars of an old circus tune"--all in Brooklyn, in broad

daylight.  And let the reader remember, and also add to his picture, as

follows, to wit: when the show was all over, the party who had shed the

most blood and overturned and hacked to pieces the most knights, or at

least had prodded the most muffin-rings, was accorded the ancient

privilege of naming and crowning the Queen of Love and Beauty--which

naming had in reality been done for, him by the "cut-and-dried" process,

and long in advance, by a committee of ladies, but the crowning he did in

person, though suffering from loss of blood, and then was taken to the

county hospital on a shutter to have his wounds dressed--these curious

things all occurring in Brooklyn, and no longer ago than one or two

yesterdays.  It seems impossible, and yet it is true.



This was doubtless the first appearance of the "tournament" up here among

the rolling-mills and factories, and will probably be the last.  It will

be well to let it retire permanently to the rural districts of Virginia,

where, it is said, the fine mailed and plumed, noble-natured,

maiden-rescuing, wrong-redressing, adventure-seeking knight of romance is

accepted and believed in by the peasantry with pleasing simplicity, while

they reject with scorn the plain, unpolished verdict whereby history

exposes him as a braggart, a ruffian, a fantastic vagabond; and an

ignoramus.



All romance aside, what shape would our admiration of the heroes of Ashby

de la Zouch be likely to take, in this practical age, if those worthies

were to rise up and come here and perform again the chivalrous deeds of

that famous passage of arms?  Nothing but a New York jury and the

insanity plea could save them from hanging, from the amiable

Bois-Guilbert and the pleasant Front-de-Boeuf clear down to the nameless

ruffians that entered the riot with unpictured shields and did their

first murder and acquired their first claim to respect that day.  The

doings of the so-called "chivalry" of the Middle Ages were absurd enough,

even when they were brutally and bloodily in earnest, and when their

surroundings of castles and donjons, savage landscapes and half-savage

peoples, were in keeping; but those doings gravely reproduced with tinsel

decorations and mock pageantry, by bucolic gentlemen with broomstick

lances, and with muffin-rings to represent the foe, and all in the midst

of the refinement and dignity of a carefully-developed modern

civilisation, is absurdity gone crazy.



Now, for next exhibition, let us have a fine representation of one of

those chivalrous wholesale butcheries and burnings of Jewish women and

children, which the crusading heroes of romance used to indulge in in

their European homes, just before starting to the Holy Land, to seize and

take to their protection the Sepulchre and defend it from "pollution."













CURIOUS RELIC FOR SALE



     "For sale, for the benefit of the Fund for the Relief of the Widows

     and Orphans of Deceased Firemen, a Curious Ancient Bedouin Pipe,

     procured at the city of Endor in Palestine, and believed to have

     once belonged to the justly-renowned Witch of Endor.  Parties

     desiring to examine this singular relic with a view to purchasing,

     can do so by calling upon Daniel S.. 119 and 121 William street, New

     York"



As per advertisement in the "Herald."  A curious old relic indeed, as I

had a good personal right to know.  In a single instant of time, a long

drawn panorama of sights and scenes in the Holy Land flashed through my

memory--town and grove, desert, camp, and caravan clattering after each

other and disappearing, leaping me with a little of the surprised and

dizzy feeling which I have experienced at sundry times when a long

express train has overtaken me at some quiet curve and gone whizzing, car

by car, around the corner and out of sight.  In that prolific instant I

saw again all the country from the Sea of Galilee and Nazareth clear to

Jerusalem, and thence over the hills of Judea and through the Vale of

Sharon to Joppa, down by the ocean.  Leaving out unimportant stretches of

country and details of incident, I saw and experienced the following

described matters and things.  Immediately three years fell away from my

age, and a vanished time was restored to me September, 1867.  It was a

flaming Oriental day--this one that had come up out of the past and

brought along its actors, its stage-properties, and scenic effects--and

our party had just ridden through the squalid hive of human vermin which

still holds the ancient Biblical name of Endor; I was bringing up the

rear on my grave four-dollar steed, who was about beginning to compose

himself for his usual noon nap.  My! only fifteen minutes before how the

black, mangy, nine-tenths naked, ten-tenths filthy, ignorant, bigoted,

besotted, hungry, lazy, malignant, screeching, crowding, struggling,

wailing, begging, cursing, hateful spawn of the original Witch had

swarmed out of the caves in the rocks and the holes and crevices in the

earth, and blocked our horses' way, besieged us, threw themselves in the

animals' path, clung to their manes, saddle-furniture, and tails, asking,

beseeching, demanding "bucksheesh!  bucksheesh!  BUCKSHEESH!"  We had

rained small copper Turkish coins among them, as fugitives fling coats

and hats to pursuing wolves, and then had spurred our way through as they

stopped to scramble for the largess.  I was fervently thankful when we

had gotten well up on the desolate hillside and outstripped them and left

them jawing and gesticulating in the rear.  What a tempest had seemingly

gone roaring and crashing by me and left its dull thunders pulsing in my

ears!



I was in the rear, as I was saying.  Our pack-mules and Arabs were far

ahead, and Dan, Jack, Moult, Davis, Denny, Church, and Birch (these names

will do as well as any to represent the boys) were following close after

them.  As my horse nodded to rest, I heard a sort of panting behind me,

and turned and saw that a tawny youth from the village had overtaken me

--a true remnant and representative of his ancestress the Witch--a

galvanised scurvy, wrought into the human shape and garnished with

ophthalmia and leprous scars--an airy creature with an invisible

shirt-front that reached below the pit of his stomach, and no other

clothing to speak of except a tobacco-pouch, an ammunition-pocket, and a

venerable gun, which was long enough to club any game with that came

within shooting distance, but far from efficient as an article of dress.



I thought to myself, "Now this disease with a human heart in it is going

to shoot me."  I smiled in derision at the idea of a Bedouin daring to

touch off his great-grandfather's rusty gun and getting his head blown

off for his pains.  But then it occurred to me, in simple school-boy

language, "Suppose he should take deliberate aim and 'haul off' and fetch

me with the butt-end of it?"  There was wisdom in that view of it, and I

stopped to parley.  I found he was only a friendly villain who wanted a

trifle of bucksheesh, and after begging what he could get in that way,

was perfectly willing to trade off everything he had for more.  I believe

he would have parted with his last shirt for bucksheesh if he had had

one.  He was smoking the "humbliest" pipe I ever saw--a dingy,

funnel-shaped, red-clay thing, streaked and grimed with oil and tears of

tobacco, and with all the different kinds of dirt there are, and thirty

per cent. of them peculiar and indigenous to Endor and perdition.  And

rank?  I never smelt anything like it.  It withered a cactus that stood

lifting its prickly hands aloft beside the trail.  It even woke up my

horse.  I said I would take that.  It cost me a franc, a Russian kopek,

a brass button, and a slate pencil; and my spendthrift lavishness so won

upon the son of the desert that he passed over his pouch of most

unspeakably villainous tobacco to me as a free gift.  What a pipe it was,

to be sure!  It had a rude brass-wire cover to it, and a little coarse

iron chain suspended from the bowl, with an iron splinter attached to

loosen up the tobacco and pick your teeth with.  The stem looked like the

half of a slender walking-stick with the bark on.



I felt that this pipe had belonged to the original Witch of Endor as soon

as I saw it; and as soon as I smelt it, I knew it.  Moreover, I asked the

Arab cub in good English if it was not so, and he answered in good Arabic

that it was.  I woke up my horse and went my way, smoking.  And presently

I said to myself reflectively, "If there is anything that could make a

man deliberately assault a dying cripple, I reckon may be an unexpected

whiff from this pipe would do it."  I smoked along till I found I was

beginning to lie, and project murder, and steal my own things out of one

pocket and hide them in another; and then I put up my treasure, took off

my spurs and put them under my horse's tail, and shortly came tearing

through our caravan like a hurricane.



From that time forward, going to Jerusalem, the Dead Sea, and the Jordan,

Bethany, Bethlehem, and everywhere, I loafed contentedly in the rear and

enjoyed my infamous pipe and revelled in imaginary villany.  But at the

end of two weeks we turned our faces toward the sea and journeyed over

the Judean hills, and through rocky defiles, and among the scenes that

Samson knew in his youth, and by and by we touched level ground just at

night, and trotted off cheerily over the plain of Sharon.  It was

perfectly jolly for three hours, and we whites crowded along together,

close after the chief Arab muleteer (all the pack-animals and the other

Arabs were miles in the rear), and we laughed, and chatted, and argued

hotly about Samson, and whether suicide was a sin or not, since Paul

speaks of Samson distinctly as being saved and in heaven.  But by and by

the night air, and the duskiness, and the weariness of eight hours in the

saddle, began to tell, and conversation flagged and finally died out

utterly.  The squeak-squeaking of the saddles grew very distinct;

occasionally somebody sighed, or started to hum a tune and gave it up;

now and then a horse sneezed.  These things only emphasised the solemnity

and the stillness.  Everybody got so listless that for once I and my

dreamer found ourselves in the lead.  It was a glad, new sensation, and

I longed to keep the place forevermore.  Every little stir in the dingy

cavalcade behind made me nervous.  Davis and I were riding side by side,

right after the Arab.  About 11 o'clock it had become really chilly, and

the dozing boys roused up and began to inquire how far it was to Ramlah

yet, and to demand that the Arab hurry along faster.  I gave it up then,

and my heart sank within me, because of course they would come up to

scold the Arab.  I knew I had to take the rear again.  In my sorrow I

unconsciously took to my pipe, my only comfort.  As I touched the match

to it the whole company came lumbering up and crowding my horse's rump

and flanks.  A whiff of smoke drifted back over my shoulder, and--



"The suffering Moses!"



"Whew!"



"By George, who opened that graveyard?"



"Boys, that Arab's been swallowing something dead!"



Right away there was a gap behind us.  Whiff after whiff sailed airily

back, and each one widened the breach.  Within fifteen seconds the

barking, and gasping, and sneezing, and coughing of the boys, and their

angry abuse of the Arab guide, had dwindled to a murmur, and Davis and I

were alone with the leader.  Davis did not know what the matter was, and

don't to this day.  Occasionally he caught a faint film of the smoke and

fell to scolding at the Arab and wondering how long he had been decaying

in that way.  Our boys kept on dropping back further and further, till at

last they were only in hearing, not in sight.  And every time they

started gingerly forward to reconnoitre or shoot the Arab, as they

proposed to do--I let them get within good fair range of my relic (she

would carry seventy yards with wonderful precision), and then wafted a

whiff among them that sent them gasping and strangling to the rear again.

I kept my gun well charged and ready, and twice within the hour I decoyed

the boys right up to my horse's tail, and then with one malarious blast

emptied the saddles, almost.  I never heard an Arab abused so in my life.

He really owed his preservation to me, because for one entire hour I

stood between him and certain death.  The boys would have killed him if

they could have got by me.



By and by, when the company were far in the rear, I put away my pipe

--I was getting fearfully dry and crisp about the gills and rather blown

with good diligent work--and spurred my animated trance up alongside the

Arab and stopped him and asked for water.  He unslung his little

gourd-shaped earthenware jug, and I put it under my moustache and took a

long, glorious, satisfying draught.  I was going to scour the mouth of

the jug a little, but I saw that I had brought the whole train together

once more by my delay, and that they were all anxious to drink too--and

would have been long ago if the Arab had not pretended that he was out of

water. So I hastened to pass the vessel to Davis.  He took a mouthful,

and never said a word, but climbed off his horse and lay down calmly in

the road. I felt sorry for Davis.  It was too late now, though, and Dan

was drinking.  Dan got down too, and hunted for a soft place.  I thought

I heard Dan say, "That Arab's friends ought to keep him in alcohol or

else take him out and bury him somewhere."  All the boys took a drink and

climbed down.  It is not well to go into further particulars.  Let us

draw the curtain upon this act.



               ..............................



Well, now, to think that after three changing years I should hear from

that curious old relic again, and see Dan advertising it for sale for the

benefit of a benevolent object.  Dan is not treating that present right.

I gave that pipe to him for a keepsake.  However, he probably finds that

it keeps away custom and interferes with business.  It is the most

convincing inanimate object in all this part of the world, perhaps.  Dan

and I were roommates in all that long "Quaker City" voyage, and whenever

I desired to have a little season of privacy I used to fire up on that

pipe and persuade Dan to go out; and he seldom waited to change his

clothes, either.  In about a quarter, or from that to three-quarters of a

minute, he would be propping up the smoke-stack on the upper deck and

cursing.  I wonder how the faithful old relic is going to sell?













A REMINISCENCE OF THE BACK SETTLEMENTS



"Now that corpse [said the undertaker, patting the folded hands of the

deceased approvingly] was a brick--every way you took him he was a brick.

He was so real accommodating, and so modest-like and simple in his last

moments.  Friends wanted metallic burial case--nothing else would do.

I couldn't get it.  There warn't going to be time anybody could see that.

Corpse said never mind, shake him up some kind of a box he could stretch

out in comfortable, he warn't particular 'bout the general style of it.

Said he went more on room than style, any way, in the last final

container.  Friends wanted a silver door-plate on the coffin, signifying

who he was and wher' he was from.  Now you know a fellow couldn't roust

out such a gaily thing as that in a little country town like this.  What

did corpse say?  Corpse said, whitewash his old canoe and dob his address

and general destination onto it with a blacking brush and a stencil

plate, long with a verse from some likely hymn or other, and pint him for

the tomb, and mark him C. O. D., and just let him skip along.  He warn't

distressed any more than you be--on the contrary just as carm and

collected as a hearse-horse; said he judged that wher' he was going to,

a body would find it considerable better to attract attention by a

picturesque moral character than a natty burial case with a swell

doorplate on it.  Splendid man, he was.  I'd druther do for a corpse like

that 'n any I've tackled in seven year.  There's some satisfaction in

buryin' a man like that.  You feel that what you're doing is appreciated.

Lord bless you, so's he got planted before he sp'iled, he was perfectly

satisfied; said his relations meant well, perfectly well, but all them

preparations was bound to delay the thing more or less, and he didn't

wish to be kept layin' round.  You never see such a clear head as what he

had--and so carm and so cool.  Just a hunk of brains that is what he was.

Perfectly awful.  It was a ripping distance from one end of that man's

head to t'other.  Often and over again he's had brain fever a-raging in

one place, and the rest of the pile didn't know anything about it--didn't

affect it any more than an Injun insurrection in Arizona affects the

Atlantic States.  Well, the relations they wanted a big funeral, but

corpse said he was down on flummery--didn't want any procession--fill the

hearse full of mourners, and get out a stern line and tow him behind.

He was the most down on style of any remains I ever struck.  A beautiful,

simple-minded creature--it was what he was, you can depend on that.  He

was just set on having things the way he wanted them, and he took a solid

comfort in laying his little plans.  He had me measure him and take a

whole raft of directions; then he had a minister stand up behind a long

box with a tablecloth over it and read his funeral sermon, saying

'Angcore, angcore!' at the good places, and making him scratch out every

bit of brag about him, and all the hifalutin; and then he made them trot

out the choir so's he could help them pick out the tunes for the

occasion, and he got them to sing 'Pop Goes the Weasel,' because he'd

always liked that tune when he was downhearted, and solemn music made him

sad; and when they sung that with tears in their eyes (because they all

loved him), and his relations grieving around, he just laid there as

happy as a bug, and trying to beat time and showing all over how much he

enjoyed it; and presently he got worked up and excited; and tried to join

in, for mind you he was pretty proud of his abilities in the singing

line; but the first time he opened his mouth and was just going to spread

himself, his breath took a walk.  I never see a man snuffed out so

sudden.  Ah, it was a great loss--it was a powerful loss to this poor

little one-horse town.  Well, well, well, I hain't got time to be

palavering along here--got to nail on the lid and mosey along with' him;

and if you'll just give me a lift we'll skeet him into the hearse and

meander along.  Relations bound to have it so--don't pay no attention to

dying injunctions, minute a corpse's gone; but if I had my way, if I

didn't respect his last wishes and tow him behind the hearse, I'll be

cuss'd.  I consider that whatever a corpse wants done for his comfort is

a little enough matter, and a man hain't got no right to deceive him or

take advantage of him--and whatever a corpse trusts me to do I'm a-going

to do, you know, even if it's to stuff him and paint him yaller and keep

him for a keepsake--you hear me!"



He cracked his whip and went lumbering away with his ancient ruin of a

hearse, and I continued my walk with a valuable lesson learned--that a

healthy and wholesome cheerfulness is not necessarily impossible to any

occupation.  The lesson is likely to be lasting, for it will take many

months to obliterate the memory of the remarks and circumstances that

impressed it.













A ROYAL COMPLIMENT



     The latest report about the Spanish crown is, that it will now be

     offered to Prince Alfonso, the second son of the King of Portugal,

     who is but five years of age.  The Spaniards have hunted through all

     the nations of Europe for a King.  They tried to get a Portuguese in

     the person of Dom-Luis, who is an old ex-monarch; they tried to get

     an Italian, in the person of Victor Emanuel's young son, the Duke of

     Genoa; they tried to get a Spaniard, in the person of Espartero, who

     is an octogenarian.  Some of them desired a French Bourbon,

     Montpensier; some of them a Spanish Bourbon, the Prince of Asturias;

     some of them an English prince, one of the sons of Queen Victoria.

     They have just tried to get the German Prince Leopold; but they have

     thought it better to give him up than take a war along with him.

     It is a long time since we first suggested to them to try an

     American ruler.  We can offer them a large number of able and

     experienced sovereigns to pick from--men skilled in statesmanship,

     versed in the science of government, and adepts in all the arts of

     administration--men who could wear the crown with dignity and rule

     the kingdom at a reasonable expense.



     There is not the least danger of Napoleon threatening them if they

     take an American sovereign; in fact, we have no doubt he would be

     pleased to support such a candidature.  We are unwilling to mention

     names--though we have a man in our eye whom we wish they had in

     theirs.--New York Tribune.



It would be but an ostentation of modesty to permit such a pointed

reference to myself to pass unnoticed.  This is the second time that 'The

Tribune' (no doubt sincerely looking to the best interests of Spain and

the world at large) has done me the great and unusual honour to propose

me as a fit person to fill the Spanish throne.  Why 'The Tribune' should

single me out in this way from the midst of a dozen Americans of higher

political prominence, is a problem which I cannot solve.  Beyond a

somewhat intimate knowledge of Spanish history and a profound veneration

for its great names and illustrious deeds, I feel that I possess no merit

that should peculiarly recommend me to this royal distinction.  I cannot

deny that Spanish history has always been mother's milk to me.  I am

proud of every Spanish achievement, from Hernando Cortes's victory at

Thermopylae down to Vasco Nunez de Balboa's discovery of the Atlantic

ocean; and of every splendid Spanish name, from Don Quixote and the Duke

of Wellington down to Don Caesar de Bazan.  However, these little graces

of erudition are of small consequence, being more showy than serviceable.



In case the Spanish sceptre is pressed upon me--and the indications

unquestionably are that it will be--I shall feel it necessary to have

certain things set down and distinctly understood beforehand.  For

instance:  My salary must be paid quarterly in advance.  In these

unsettled times it will not do to trust.  If Isabella had adopted this

plan, she would be roosting on her ancestral throne to-day, for the

simple reason that her subjects never could have raised three months of a

royal salary in advance, and of course they could not have discharged her

until they had squared up with her.  My salary must be paid in gold; when

greenbacks are fresh in a country, they are too fluctuating.  My salary

has got to be put at the ruling market rate; I am not going to cut under

on the trade, and they are not going to trail me a long way from home and

then practise on my ignorance and play me for a royal North Adams

Chinaman, by any means.  As I understand it, imported kings generally get

five millions a year and house-rent free.  Young George of Greece gets

that.  As the revenues only yield two millions, he has to take the

national note for considerable; but even with things in that sort of

shape he is better fixed than he was in Denmark, where he had to

eternally stand up because he had no throne to sit on, and had to give

bail for his board, because a royal apprentice gets no salary there while

he is learning his trade.  England is the place for that.  Fifty thousand

dollars a year Great Britain pays on each royal child that is born, and

this is increased from year to year as the child becomes more and more

indispensable to his country.  Look at Prince Arthur.  At first he only

got the usual birth-bounty; but now that he has got so that he can dance,

there is simply no telling what wages he gets.



I should have to stipulate that the Spanish people wash more and

endeavour to get along with less quarantine.  Do you know, Spain keeps

her ports fast locked against foreign traffic three-fourths of each year,

because one day she is scared about the cholera, and the next about the

plague, and next the measles, next the hooping cough, the hives, and the

rash? but she does not mind leonine leprosy and elephantiasis any more

than a great and enlightened civilisation minds freckles.  Soap would

soon remove her anxious distress about foreign distempers.  The reason

arable land is so scarce in Spain is because the people squander so much

of it on their persons, and then when they die it is improvidently buried

with them.



I should feel obliged to stipulate that Marshal Serrano be reduced to the

rank of constable, or even roundsman.  He is no longer fit to be City

Marshal.  A man who refused to be king because he was too old and feeble,

is ill qualified to help sick people to the station-house when they are

armed and their form of delirium tremens is of the exuberant and

demonstrative kind.



I should also require that a force be sent to chase the late Queen

Isabella out of France.  Her presence there can work no advantage to

Spain, and she ought to be made to move at once; though, poor thing, she

has been chaste enough heretofore--for a Spanish woman.



I should also require that--



I am at this moment authoritatively informed that "The Tribune" did not

mean me, after all.  Very well, I do not care two cents.













THE APPROACHING EPIDEMIC



One calamity to which the death of Mr. Dickens dooms this country has not

awakened the concern to which its gravity entitles it.  We refer to the

fact that the nation is to be lectured to death and read to death all

next winter, by Tom, Dick, and Harry, with poor lamented Dickens for a

pretext.  All the vagabonds who can spell will afflict the people with

"readings" from Pickwick and Copperfield, and all the insignificants who

have been ennobled by the notice of the great novelist or transfigured by

his smile will make a marketable commodity of it now, and turn the sacred

reminiscence to the practical use of procuring bread and butter.  The

lecture rostrums will fairly swarm with these fortunates.  Already the

signs of it are perceptible.  Behold how the unclean creatures are

wending toward the dead lion and gathering to the feast:



"Reminiscences of Dickens."  A lecture.  By John Smith, who heard him

read eight times.



"Remembrances of Charles Dickens."  A lecture.  By John Jones, who saw

him once in a street car and twice in a barber shop.



"Recollections of Mr. Dickens."  A lecture.  By John Brown, who gained a

wide fame by writing deliriously appreciative critiques and rhapsodies

upon the great author's public readings; and who shook hands with the

great author upon various occasions, and held converse with him several

times.



"Readings from Dickens."  By John White, who has the great delineator's

style and manner perfectly, having attended all his readings in this

country and made these things a study, always practising each reading

before retiring, and while it was hot from the great delineator's lips.

Upon this occasion Mr. W. will exhibit the remains of a cigar which he

saw Mr. Dickens smoke.  This Relic is kept in a solid silver box made

purposely for it.



"Sights and Sounds of the Great Novelist."  A popular lecture.  By John

Gray, who waited on his table all the time he was at the Grand Hotel,

New York, and still has in his possession and will exhibit to the

audience a fragment of the Last Piece of Bread which the lamented author

tasted in this country.



"Heart Treasures of Precious Moments with Literature's Departed Monarch."

A lecture.  By Miss Serena Amelia Tryphenia McSpadden, who still wears,

and will always wear, a glove upon the hand made sacred by the clasp of

Dickens.  Only Death shall remove it.



"Readings from Dickens."  By Mrs. J. O'Hooligan Murphy, who washed for

him.



"Familiar Talks with the Great Author."  A narrative lecture.  By John

Thomas, for two weeks his valet in America.



And so forth, and so on.  This isn't half the list.  The man who has a

"Toothpick once used by Charles Dickens" will have to have a hearing; and

the man who "once rode in an omnibus with Charles Dickens;" and the lady

to whom Charles Dickens "granted the hospitalities of his umbrella during

a storm;" and the person who "possesses a hole which once belonged in a

handkerchief owned by Charles Dickens."  Be patient and long-suffering,

good people, for even this does not fill up the measure of what you must

endure next winter.  There is no creature in all this land who has had

any personal relations with the late Mr. Dickens, however slight or

trivial, but will shoulder his way to the rostrum and inflict his

testimony upon his helpless countrymen.  To some people it is fatal to be

noticed by greatness.















THE TONE-IMPARTING COMMITTEE



I get old and ponderously respectable, only one thing will be able to

make me truly happy, and that will be to be put on the Venerable

Tone-Imparting committee of the city of New York, and have nothing to do

but sit on the platform, solemn and imposing, along with Peter Cooper,

Horace Greeley, etc., etc., and shed momentary fame at second hand on

obscure lecturers, draw public attention to lectures which would

otherwise clack eloquently to sounding emptiness, and subdue audiences

into respectful hearing of all sorts of unpopular and outlandish dogmas

and isms.  That is what I desire for the cheer and gratification of my

gray hairs.  Let me but sit up there with those fine relics of the Old

Red Sandstone Period and give Tone to an intellectual entertainment twice

a week, and be so reported, and my happiness will be complete.  Those men

have been my envy for long, long time.  And no memories of my life are so

pleasant as my reminiscence of their long and honorable career in the

Tone-imparting service.  I can recollect that first time I ever saw them

on the platforms just as well as I can remember the events of yesterday.

Horace Greeley sat on the right, Peter Cooper on the left, and Thomas

Jefferson, Red Jacket, Benjamin Franklin, and John Hancock sat between

them.  This was on the 22d of December, 1799, on the occasion of the

state' funeral of George Washington in New York.  It was a great day,

that--a great day, and a very, very sad one.  I remember that Broadway

was one mass of black crape from Castle Garden nearly up to where the

City Hall now stands.  The next time I saw these gentlemen officiate was

at a ball given for the purpose of procuring money and medicines for the

sick and wounded soldiers and sailors.  Horace Greeley occupied one side

of the platform on which the musicians were exalted, and Peter Cooper the

other.  There were other Tone-imparters attendant upon the two chiefs,

but I have forgotten their names now.  Horace Greeley, gray-haired and

beaming, was in sailor costume--white duck pants, blue shirt, open at the

breast, large neckerchief, loose as an ox-bow, and tied with a jaunty

sailor knot, broad turnover collar with star in the corner, shiny black

little tarpaulin hat roosting daintily far back on head, and flying two

gallant long ribbons.  Slippers on ample feet, round spectacles on

benignant nose, and pitchfork in hand, completed Mr.  Greeley, and made

him, in my boyish admiration, every inch a sailor, and worthy to be the

honored great-grandfather of the Neptune he was so ingeniously

representing.  I shall never forget him.  Mr. Cooper was dressed as a

general of militia, and was dismally and oppressively warlike.  I

neglected to remark, in the proper place, that the soldiers and sailors

in whose aid the ball was given had just been sent in from Boston--this

was during the war of 1812.  At the grand national reception of

Lafayette, in 1824, Horace  Greeley sat on the right and Peter Cooper to

the left.  The other Tone-imparters of the day are sleeping the sleep of

the just now.  I was in the audience when Horace Greeley Peter Cooper,

and other chief citizens imparted tone to the great meetings in favor of

French liberty, in 1848.  Then I never saw them any more until here

lately; but now that I am living tolerably near the city, I run down

every time I see it announced that "Horace Greeley, Peter Cooper, and

several other distinguished citizens will occupy seats on the platform;"

and next morning, when I read in the first paragraph of the phonographic

report that "Horace Greeley, Peter Cooper, and several other

distinguished citizens occupied seats on the platform," I say to myself,

"Thank God, I was present."  Thus I have been enabled to see these

substantial old friends of mine sit on the platform and give tone to

lectures on anatomy, and lectures on agriculture, and lectures on

stirpiculture, and lectures on astronomy, on chemistry, on miscegenation,

on "Is Man Descended from the Kangaroo?" on veterinary matters, on all

kinds of religion, and several kinds of politics; and have seen them give

tone and grandeur to the Four-legged Girl, the Siamese Twins, the Great

Egyptian Sword Swallower, and the Old Original Jacobs.  Whenever somebody

is to lecture on a subject not of general interest, I know that my

venerated Remains of the Old Red Sandstone Period will be on the

platform; whenever a lecturer is to appear whom nobody has heard of

before, nor will be likely to seek to see, I know that the real

benevolence of my old friends will be taken advantage of, and that they

will be on the platform (and in the bills) as an advertisement; and

whenever any new and obnoxious deviltry in philosophy, morals, or

politics is to be sprung upon the people, I know perfectly well that

these intrepid old heroes will be on the platform too, in the interest of

full and free discussion, and to crush down all narrower and less

generous souls with the solid dead weight of their awful respectability.

And let us all remember that while these inveterate and imperishable

presiders (if you please) appear on the platform every night in the year

as regularly as the volunteered piano from Steinway's or Chickering's,

and have bolstered up and given tone to a deal of questionable merit and

obscure emptiness in their time, they have also diversified this

inconsequential service by occasional powerful uplifting and upholding of

great progressive ideas which smaller men feared to meddle with or

countenance.













OUR PRECIOUS LUNATIC



[From the Buffalo Express, Saturday, May 14, 1870.]



                                             New YORK, May 10.



The Richardson-McFarland jury had been out one hour and fifty minutes.

A breathless silence brooded over court and auditory--a silence and a

stillness so absolute, notwithstanding the vast multitude of human beings

packed together there, that when some one far away among the throng under

the northeast balcony cleared his throat with a smothered little cough it

startled everybody uncomfortably, so distinctly did it grate upon the

pulseless air.  At that imposing moment the bang of a door was heard,

then the shuffle of approaching feet, and then a sort of surging and

swaying disorder among the heads at the entrance from the jury-room told

them that the Twelve were coming.  Presently all was silent again, and

the foreman of the jury rose and said:



"Your  Honor and Gentleman:  We, the jury charged with the duty of

determining whether the prisoner at the bar, Daniel McFarland, has been

guilty of murder, in taking by surprise an unarmed man and shooting him

to death, or whether the prisoner is afflicted with a sad but

irresponsible insanity which at times can be cheered only by violent

entertainment with firearms, do find as follows, namely:



"That the prisoner, Daniel McFarland, is insane as above described.

Because:



"1.  His great grandfather's stepfather was tainted with insanity, and

frequently killed people who were distasteful to him.  Hence, insanity is

hereditary in the family.



"2.  For nine years the prisoner at the bar did not adequately support his

family.  Strong circumstantial evidence of insanity.



"3.  For nine years he made of his home, as a general thing, a poor-house;

sometimes (but very rarely) a cheery, happy habitation; frequently the

den of a beery, drivelling, stupefied animal; but never, as far as

ascertained, the abiding place of a gentleman.  These be evidences of

insanity.



"4.  He once took his young unmarried sister-in-law to the museum; while

there his hereditary insanity came upon him to such a degree that he

hiccupped and staggered; and afterward, on the way home, even made love

to the young girl he was protecting.  These are the acts of a person not

in his right mind.



"5.  For a good while his sufferings were so great that he had to submit

to the inconvenience of having his wife give public readings for the

family support; and at times, when he handed these shameful earnings to

the barkeeper, his haughty soul was so torn with anguish that he could

hardly stand without leaning against something.  At such times he has

been known to shed tears into his sustenance till it diluted to utter

inefficiency.  Inattention of this nature is not the act of a Democrat

unafflicted in mind.



"6.  He never spared expense in making his wife comfortable during her

occasional confinements.  Her father is able to testify to this.  There

was always an element of unsoundness about the prisoner's generosities

that is very suggestive at this time and before this court.



"7.  Two years ago the prisoner came fearlessly up behind Richardson in

the dark, and shot him in the leg.  The prisoner's brave and protracted

defiance of an adversity that for years had left him little to depend

upon for support but a wife who sometimes earned scarcely anything for

weeks at a time, is evidence that he would have appeared in front of

Richardson and shot him in the stomach if he had not been insane at the

time of the shooting.



"8.  Fourteen months ago the prisoner told Archibald Smith that he was

going to kill Richardson.  This is insanity.



"9.  Twelve months ago he told Marshall P. Jones that he was going to kill

Richardson.  Insanity.



"10.  Nine months ago he was lurking about Richardson's home in New

Jersey, and said he was going to kill Richardson.  Insanity.



"11.  Seven months ago he showed a pistol to Seth Brown and said that that

was for Richardson.  He said Brown testified that at that time it seemed

plain that something was the matter with McFarland, for he crossed the

street diagonally nine times in fifty yards, apparently without any

settled reason for doing so, and finally fell in the gutter and went to

sleep.  He remarked at the time that McFarland acted strange--believed he

was insane.  Upon hearing Brown's evidence, John W. Galen, M.D., affirmed

at once that McFarland was insane.



"12.  Five months ago, McFarland showed his customary pistol, in his

customary way, to his bed-fellow, Charles A. Dana, and told him he was

going to kill Richardson the first time an opportunity offered.  Evidence

of insanity.



"13.  Five months and two weeks ago McFarland asked John Morgan the time

of day, and turned and walked rapidly away without waiting for an answer.

Almost indubitable evidence of insanity.  And--



"14.  It is remarkable that exactly one week after this circumstance, the

prisoner, Daniel McFarland, confronted Albert D. Richardson suddenly and

without warning, and shot him dead.  This is manifest insanity.

Everything we know of the prisoner goes to show that if he had been sane

at the time, he would have shot his victim from behind.



"15.  There is an absolutely overwhelming mass of testimony to show that

an hour before the shooting, McFarland was ANXIOUS AND UNEASY, and that

five minutes after it he was EXCITED.  Thus the accumulating conjectures

and evidences of insanity culminate in this sublime and unimpeachable

proof of it.  Therefore--



"Your Honor and Gentlemen--We the jury pronounce the said Daniel McFarland

INNOCENT OF MURDER, BUT CALAMITOUSLY INSANE."



The scene that ensued almost defies description.  Hats, handkerchiefs and

bonnets were frantically waved above the massed heads in the courtroom,

and three tremendous cheers and a tiger told where the sympathies of the

court and people were.  Then a hundred pursed lips were advanced to kiss

the liberated prisoner, and many a hand thrust out to give him a

congratulatory shake--but presto! with a maniac's own quickness and a

maniac's own fury the lunatic assassin of Richardson fell upon his

friends with teeth and nails, boots and office furniture, and the amazing

rapidity with which he broke heads and limbs, and rent and sundered

bodies, till nearly a hundred citizens were reduced to mere quivering

heaps of fleshy odds and ends and crimson rags, was like nothing in this

world but the exultant frenzy of a plunging, tearing, roaring devil of a

steam machine when it snatches a human being and spins him and whirls him

till he shreds away to nothingness like a "Four o'clock" before the

breath of a child.



The destruction was awful.  It is said that within the space of eight

minutes McFarland killed and crippled some six score persons and tore

down a large portion of the City Hall building, carrying away and casting

into Broadway six or seven marble columns fifty-four feet long and

weighing nearly two tons each.  But he was finally captured and sent in

chains to the lunatic asylum for life.



(By late telegrams it appears that this is a mistake.--Editor Express.)



But the really curious part of this whole matter is yet to be told.  And

that is, that McFarland's most intimate friends believe that the very

next time that it ever occurred to him that the insanity plea was not a

mere politic pretense, was when the verdict came in.  They think that the

startling thought burst upon him then, that if twelve good and true men,

able to comprehend all the baseness of perjury, proclaimed under oath

that he was a lunatic, there was no gainsaying such evidence and that he

UNQUESTIONABLY WAS INSANE!



Possibly that was really the way of it.  It is dreadful to think that

maybe the most awful calamity that can befall a man, namely, loss of

reason, was precipitated upon this poor prisoner's head by a jury that

could have hanged him instead, and so done him a mercy and his country a

service.



                             POSTSCRIPT-LATER



May 11--I do not expect anybody to believe so astounding a thing, and yet

it is the solemn truth that instead of instantly sending the dangerous

lunatic to the insane asylum (which I naturally supposed they would do,

and so I prematurely said they had) the court has actually SET HIM AT

LIBERTY.  Comment is unnecessary.       M.  T.













THE EUROPEAN WARS--[From the Buffalo Express, July 25, 1870.]



                               First Day

                          THE EUROPEAN WAR!!!



                            NO BATTLE YET!!!

                        HOSTILITIES IMMINENT!!!

                         TREMENDOUS EXCITEMENT.

                            AUSTRIA ARMING!

                                                  BERLIN, Tuesday.



No battle has been fought yet.  But hostilities may burst forth any week.



There is tremendous excitement here over news from the front that two

companies of French soldiers are assembling there.



It is rumoured that Austria is arming--what with, is not known.



                         .......................



                               Second Day

                            THE EUROPEAN WAR



                             NO BATTLE YET!

                           FIGHTING IMMINENT.

                           AWFUL EXCITEMENT.

                       RUSSIA SIDES WITH PRUSSIA!

                           ENGLAND NEUTRAL!!

                          AUSTRIA NOT ARMING.

                                                  BERLIN, Wednesday.



No battle has been fought yet.  However, all thoughtful men feel that the

land may be drenched with blood before the Summer is over.



There is an awful excitement here over the rumour that two companies of

Prussian troops have concentrated on the border.  German confidence

remains unshaken!!



There is news to the effect that Russia espouses the cause of Prussia and

will bring 4,000,000 men to the field.



England proclaims strict neutrality.



The report that Austria is arming needs confirmation.



                         .........................



                               Third Day

                            THE EUROPEAN WAR



                             NO BATTLE YET!

                          BLOODSHED IMMINENT!!

                         ENORMOUS EXCITEMENT!!

                         INVASION OF PRUSSIA!!

                          INVASION OF FRANCE!!

                       RUSSIA SIDES WITH FRANCE.

                         ENGLAND STILL NEUTRAL!

                             FIRING HEARD!

                      THE EMPEROR TO TAKE COMMAND.

                                                  PARIS, Thursday.



No battle has been fought yet.  But Field Marshal McMahon telegraphs thus

to the Emperor:



"If the Frinch army survoives until Christmas there'll be throuble.

Forninst this fact it would be sagacious if the divil wint the rounds of

his establishment to prepare for the occasion, and tuk the precaution to

warrum up the Prussian depairtment a bit agin the day.

                                                  MIKE."



There is an enormous state of excitement here over news from the front to

the effect that yesterday France and Prussia were simultaneously invaded

by the two bodies of troops which lately assembled on the border.  Both

armies conducted their invasions secretly and are now hunting around for

each other on opposite sides of the border.



Russia espouses the cause of France.  She will bring 200,000 men to the

field.



England continues to remain neutral.



Firing was heard yesterday in the direction of Blucherberg, and for a

while the excitement was intense.  However the people reflected that the

country in that direction is uninhabitable, and impassable by anything

but birds, they became quiet again.



The Emperor sends his troops to the field with immense enthusiasm.  He

will lead them in person, when they return.



                         .....................



                               Fourth Day

                           THE EUROPEAN WAR!



                            NO BATTLE YET!!

                        THE TROOPS GROWING OLD!

                      BUT BITTER STRIFE IMMINENT!

                         PRODIGIOUS EXCITEMENT!

                THE INVASIONS SUCCESSFULLY ACCOMPLISHED

                         AND THE INVADERS SAFE!

                      RUSSIA SIDES WITH BOTH SIDES

                        ENGLAND WILL FIGHT BOTH!

                                                  LONDON, Friday.



No battle has been fought thus far, but a million impetuous soldiers are

gritting their teeth at each other across the border, and the most

serious fears entertained that if they do not die of old age first, there

will be bloodshed in this war yet.



The prodigious patriotic excitement goes on.  In Prussia, per Prussian

telegrams, though contradicted from France.  In France, per French

telegrams, though contradicted from Prussia.



The Prussian invasion of France was a magnificent success.  The military

failed to find the French, but made good their return to Prussia without

the loss of a single man.  The French invasion of Prussia is also

demonstrated to have been a brilliant and successful achievement.  The

army failed to find the Prussians, but made good their return to the

Vaterland without bloodshed, after having invaded as much as they wanted

to.



There is glorious news from Russia to the effect that she will side with

both sides.



Also from England--she will fight both sides.



                         ....................



LONDON, Thursday evening.



I rushed over too soon.  I shall return home on Tuesday's steamer and

wait until the war begins.         M. T.













THE WILD MAN INTERVIEWED

[From the Buffalo Express, September 18, 1869.]



There has been so much talk about the mysterious "wild man" out there in

the West for some time, that I finally felt it was my duty to go out and

interview him.  There was something peculiarly and touchingly romantic

about the creature and his strange actions, according to the newspaper

reports.  He was represented as being hairy, long-armed, and of great

strength and stature; ugly and cumbrous; avoiding men, but appearing

suddenly and unexpectedly to women and children; going armed with a club,

but never molesting any creature, except sheep, or other prey; fond of

eating and drinking, and not particular about the quality, quantity, or

character of the beverages and edibles; living in the woods like a wild

beast, but never angry; moaning, and sometimes howling, but never

uttering articulate sounds.



Such was "Old Shep" as the papers painted him.  I felt that the story of

his life must be a sad one--a story of suffering, disappointment, and

exile--a story of man's inhumanity to man in some shape or other--and I

longed to persuade the secret from him.



                         .....................



"Since you say you are a member of the press," said the wild man, "I am

willing to tell you all you wish to know.  Bye and bye you will

comprehend why it is that I wish to unbosom myself to a newspaper man

when I have so studiously avoided conversation with other people.  I will

now unfold my strange story.  I was born with the world we live upon,

almost.  I am the son of Cain."



"What?"



"I was present when the flood was announced."



"Which?"



"I am the father of the Wandering Jew."



"Sir?"



I moved out of range of his club, and went on taking notes, but keeping a

wary eye on him all the while.  He smiled a melancholy smile and resumed:



"When I glance back over the dreary waste of ages, I see many a

glimmering and mark that is familiar to my memory.  And oh, the leagues

I have travelled! the things I have seen! the events I have helped to

emphasise!  I was at the assassination of Caesar.  I marched upon Mecca

with Mahomet.  I was in the Crusades, and stood with Godfrey when he

planted the banner of the cross on the battlements of Jerusalem.  I--"



"One moment, please.  Have you given these items to any other journal?

Can I--"



"Silence.  I was in the Pinta's shrouds with Columbus when America burst

upon his vision. I saw Charles I beheaded.  I was in London when the

Gunpowder Plot was discovered.  I was present at the trial of Warren

Hastings.  I was on American soil when the battle of Lexington was fought

when the declaration was promulgated--when Cornwallis surrendered

--When Washington died.  I entered Paris with Napoleon after Elba.  I was

present when you mounted your guns and manned your fleets for the war of

1812--when the South fired upon Sumter--when Richmond fell--when the

President's life was taken.  In all the ages I have helped to celebrate

the triumphs of genius, the achievements of arms, the havoc of storm,

fire, pestilence, famine."



"Your career has been a stirring one.  Might I ask how you came to locate

in these dull Kansas woods, when you have been so accustomed to

excitement during what I might term so protracted a period, not to put

too fine a point on it?"



"Listen.  Once I was the honoured servitor of the noble and illustrious"

(here he heaved a sigh, and passed his hairy hand across his eyes) "but

in these degenerate days I am become the slave of quack doctors and

newspapers.  I am driven from pillar to post and hurried up and down,

sometimes with stencil-plate and paste-brush to defile the fences with

cabalistic legends, and sometimes in grotesque and extravagant character

at the behest of some driving journal.  I attended to that Ocean Bank

robbery some weeks ago, when I was hardly rested from finishing up the

pow-wow about the completion of the Pacific Railroad; immediately I was

spirited off to do an atrocious, murder for the benefit of the New York

papers; next to attend the wedding of a patriarchal millionaire; next to

raise a hurrah about the great boat race; and then, just when I had begun

to hope that my old bones would have a rest, I am bundled off to this

howling wilderness to strip, and jibber, and be ugly and hairy, and pull

down fences and waylay sheep, and waltz around with a club, and play

'Wild Man' generally--and all to gratify the whim of a bedlam of crazy

newspaper scribblers?  From one end of the continent to the other, I am

described as a gorilla, with a sort of human seeming about me--and all to

gratify this quill-driving scum of the earth!"



"Poor old carpet bagger!"



"I have been served infamously, often, in modern and semi-modern times.

I have been compelled by base men to create fraudulent history, and to

perpetrate all sorts of humbugs.  I wrote those crazy Junius letters, I

moped in a French dungeon for fifteen years, and wore a ridiculous Iron

Mask; I poked around your Northern forests, among your vagabond Indians,

a solemn French idiot, personating the ghost of a dead Dauphin, that the

gaping world might wonder if we had 'a Bourbon among us'; I have played

sea-serpent off Nahant, and Woolly-Horse and What-is-it for the museums;

I have interviewed politicians for the Sun, worked up all manner of

miracles for the Herald, ciphered up election returns for the World,

and thundered Political Economy through the Tribune.  I have done all the

extravagant things that the wildest invention could contrive, and done

them well, and this is my reward--playing Wild Man in Kansas without a

shirt!"



"Mysterious being, a light dawns vaguely upon me--it grows apace--what

--what is your name."



"SENSATION!"



"Hence, horrible shape!"



It spoke again:



"Oh pitiless fate, my destiny hounds me once more.  I am called.  I go.

Alas, is there no rest for me?"



In a moment the Wild Man's features seemed to soften and refine, and his

form to assume a more human grace and symmetry.  His club changed to a

spade, and he shouldered it and started away sighing profoundly and

shedding tears.



"Whither, poor shade?"



"TO DIG UP THE BYRON FAMILY!"



Such was the response that floated back upon the wind as the sad spirit

shook its ringlets to the breeze, flourished its shovel aloft, and

disappeared beyond the brow of the hill.



All of which is in strict accordance with the facts.



                                                            M. T.









LAST WORDS OF GREAT MEN--[From the Buffalo Express, September 11, 1889.]



     Marshal Neil's last words were: "L'armee fran-caise!" (The French

     army.)--Exchange.



What a sad thing it is to see a man close a grand career with a

plagiarism in his mouth.  Napoleon's last words were: "Tete d'armee."

(Head of the army.)  Neither of those remarks amounts to anything as

"last words," and reflect little credit upon the utterers.



A distinguished man should be as particular about his last words as he is

about his last breath.  He should write them out on a slip of paper and

take the judgment of his friends on them.  He should never leave such a

thing to the last hour of his life, and trust to an intellectual spirit

at the last moment to enable him to say something smart with his latest

gasp and launch into eternity with grandeur.  No--a man is apt to be too

much fagged and exhausted, both in body and mind, at such a time, to be

reliable; and maybe the very thing he wants to say, he cannot think of to

save him; and besides there are his weeping friends bothering around;

and worse than all as likely as not he may have to deliver his last gasp

before he is expecting to.  A man cannot always expect to think of a

natty thing to say under such circumstances, and so it is pure egotistic

ostentation to put it off.  There is hardly a case on record where a man

came to his last moment unprepared and said a good thing hardly a case

where a man trusted to that last moment and did not make a solemn botch

of it and go out of the world feeling absurd.



Now there was Daniel Webster.  Nobody could tell him anything.  He was

not afraid.  He could do something neat when the time came.  And how did

it turn out?  Why, his will had to be fixed over; and then all the

relations came; and first one thing and then another interfered, till at

last he only had a chance to say, "I still live," and up he went.



Of course he didn't still live, because he died--and so he might as well

have kept his last words to himself as to have gone and made such a

failure of it as that.  A week before that fifteen minutes of calm

reflection would have enabled that man to contrive some last words that

would have been a credit to himself and a comfort to his family for

generations to come.



And there was John Quincy Adams.  Relying on his splendid abilities and

his coolness in emergencies, he trusted to a happy hit at the last moment

to carry him through, and what was the result?  Death smote him in the

House of Representatives, and he observed, casually, "This is the last of

earth."  The last of earth!  Why "the last of earth" when there was so

much more left?  If he had said it was the last rose of summer or the

last run of shad, it would have had as much point in it.  What he meant

to say was, "Adam was the first and Adams is the last of earth," but he

put it off a trifle too long, and so he had to go with that unmeaning

observation on his lips.



And there we have Napoleon's "Tete d'armee."  That don't mean anything.

Taken by itself, "Head of the army," is no more important than "Head of

the police."  And yet that was a man who could have said a good thing if

he had barred out the doctor and studied over it a while.  Marshal Neil,

with half a century at his disposal, could not dash off anything better

in his last moments than a poor plagiarism of another man's words, which

were not worth plagiarizing in the first place.  "The French army."

Perfectly irrelevant--perfectly flat utterly pointless.  But if he had

closed one eye significantly, and said, "The subscriber has made it

lively for the French army," and then thrown a little of the comic into

his last gasp, it would have been a thing to remember with satisfaction

all the rest of his life.  I do wish our great men would quit saying

these flat things just at the moment they die.  Let us have their

next-to-the-last words for a while, and see if we cannot patch up from

them something that will be more satisfactory.



The public does not wish to be outraged in this way all the time.



But when we come to call to mind the last words of parties who took the

trouble to make the proper preparation for the occasion, we immediately

notice a happy difference in the result.



There was Chesterfield.  Lord Chesterfield had laboured all his life to

build up the most shining reputation for affability and elegance of

speech and manners the world has ever seen.  And could you suppose he

failed to appreciate the efficiency of characteristic "last words," in

the matter of seizing the successfully driven nail of such a reputation

and clinching on the other side for ever?  Not he.  He prepared himself.

He kept his eye on the clock and his finger on his pulse.  He awaited his

chance.  And at last, when he knew his time was come, he pretended to

think a new visitor had entered, and so, with the rattle in his throat

emphasised for dramatic effect, he said to the servant, "Shin around,

John, and get the gentleman a chair."  And so he died, amid thunders of

applause.



Next we have Benjamin Franklin.  Franklin, the author of Poor Richard's

quaint sayings; Franklin the immortal axiom-builder, who used to sit up

at nights reducing the rankest old threadbare platitudes to crisp and

snappy maxims that had a nice, varnished, original look in their

regimentals; who said, "Virtue is its own reward;" who said,

"Procrastination is the thief of time;" who said, "Time and tide wait for

no man" and "Necessity is the mother of invention;" good old Franklin,

the Josh Billings of the eighteenth century--though, sooth to say, the

latter transcends him in proverbial originality as much as he falls short

of him in correctness of orthography.  What sort of tactics did Franklin

pursue?  He pondered over his last words for as much as two weeks, and

then when the time came, he said, "None but the brave deserve the fair,"

and died happy.  He could not have said a sweeter thing if he had lived

till he was an idiot.



Byron made a poor business of it, and could not think of anything to say,

at the last moment but, "Augusta--sister--Lady Byron--tell Harriet

Beecher Stowe"--etc., etc.,--but Shakespeare was ready and said, "England

expects every man to do his duty!" and went off with splendid eclat.



And there are other instances of sagacious preparation for a felicitous

closing remark.  For instance:



Joan of Arc said, "Tramp, tramp, tramp the boys are marching."



Alexander the Great said, "Another of those Santa Cruz punches, if you

please."



The Empress Josephine said, "Not for Jo-" and could get no further.



Cleopatra said, "The Old Guard dies, but never surrenders."



Sir Walter Raleigh said, "Executioner, can I take your whetstone a

moment, please?" though what for is not clear.



John Smith said, "Alas, I am the last of my race."



Queen Elizabeth said, "Oh, I would give my kingdom for one moment more

--I have forgotten my last words."



And Red Jacket, the noblest Indian brave that ever wielded a tomahawk in

defence of a friendless and persecuted race, expired with these touching

words upon his lips, "Wawkawampanoosucwinnebayowallazvsagamoresa-

skatchewan."  There was not a dry eye in the wigwam.



Let not this lesson be lost upon our public men.  Let them take a healthy

moment for preparation, and contrive some last words that shall be neat

and to the point.  Let Louis Napoleon say,



"I am content to follow my uncle--still, I do not wish to improve upon

his last word.  Put me down for 'Tete d'armee.'"



And Garret Davis, "Let me recite the unabridged dictionary."



And H. G., "I desire, now, to say a few words on political economy."



And Mr. Bergh, "Only take part of me at a time, if the load will be

fatiguing to the hearse horses."



And Andrew Johnson, "I have been an alderman, Member of Congress,

Governor, Senator, Pres--adieu, you know the rest."



And Seward., "Alas!-ka."



And Grant, "O."



All of which is respectfully submitted, with the most honorable

intentions.

                                                       M. T.



P. S.--I am obliged to leave out the illustrations.  The artist finds it

impossible to make a picture of people's last words.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Curious Republic of Gondour and

Other Whimsical Sketches, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













1601



by Mark Twain





                              MARK TWAIN'S

                              [Date, 1601]



                              Conversation

                    As it was by the Social Fireside

                       in the Time of the Tudors





INTRODUCTION



"Born irreverent," scrawled Mark Twain on a scratch pad, "--like all

other people I have ever known or heard of--I am hoping to remain so

while there are any reverent irreverences left to make fun of."

--[Holograph manuscript of Samuel L.  Clemens, in the collection of the

F. J. Meine]



Mark Twain was just as irreverent as he dared be, and 1601 reveals his

richest expression of sovereign contempt for overstuffed language,

genteel literature, and conventional idiocies.  Later, when a magazine

editor apostrophized, "O that we had a Rabelais!"  Mark impishly and

anonymously--submitted 1601; and that same editor, a praiser of Rabelais,

scathingly abused it and the sender.  In this episode, as in many others,

Mark Twain, the "bad boy" of American literature, revealed his huge

delight in blasting the shams of contemporary hypocrisy.  Too, there was

always the spirit of Tom Sawyer deviltry in Mark's make-up that prompted

him, as he himself boasted, to see how much holy indignation he could

stir up in the world.





WHO WROTE 1601?



The correct and complete title of 1601, as first issued, was: [Date,

1601.] 'Conversation, as it was by the Social Fireside, in the Time of

the Tudors.'  For many years after its anonymous first issue in 1880,

its authorship was variously conjectured and widely disputed.  In Boston,

William T. Ball, one of the leading theatrical critics during the late

90's, asserted that it was originally written by an English actor (name

not divulged) who gave it to him.  Ball's original, it was said, looked

like a newspaper strip in the way it was printed, and may indeed have

been a proof pulled in some newspaper office.  In St. Louis, William

Marion Reedy, editor of the St. Louis Mirror, had seen this famous tour

de force circulated in the early 80's in galley-proof form; he first

learned from Eugene Field that it was from the pen of Mark Twain.



"Many people," said Reedy, "thought the thing was done by Field and

attributed, as a joke, to Mark Twain.  Field had a perfect genius for

that sort of thing, as many extant specimens attest, and for that sort of

practical joke; but to my thinking the humor of the piece is too mellow

--not hard and bright and bitter--to be Eugene Field's."  Reedy's opinion

hits off the fundamental difference between these two great humorists;

one half suspects that Reedy was thinking of Field's French Crisis.



But Twain first claimed his bantling from the fog of anonymity in 1906,

in a letter addressed to Mr. Charles Orr, librarian of Case Library,

Cleveland.  Said Clemens, in the course of his letter, dated July 30,

1906, from Dublin, New Hampshire:



"The title of the piece is 1601.  The piece is a supposititious

conversation which takes place in Queen Elizabeth's closet in that year,

between the Queen, Ben Jonson, Beaumont, Sir Walter Raleigh, the Duchess

of Bilgewater, and one or two others, and is not, as John Hay mistakenly

supposes, a serious effort to bring back our literature and philosophy to

the sober and chaste Elizabeth's time; if there is a decent word findable

in it, it is because I overlooked it.  I hasten to assure you that it is

not printed in my published writings."





TWITTING THE REV. JOSEPH TWICHELL



The circumstances of how 1601 came to be written have since been

officially revealed by Albert Bigelow Paine in 'Mark Twain,

A Bibliography' (1912), and in the publication of Mark Twain's Notebook

(1935).



1601 was written during the summer of 1876 when the Clemens family had

retreated to Quarry Farm in Elmira County, New York.  Here Mrs. Clemens

enjoyed relief from social obligations, the children romped over the

countryside, and Mark retired to his octagonal study, which, perched high

on the hill, looked out upon the valley below.  It was in the famous

summer of 1876, too, that Mark was putting the finishing touches to Tom

Sawyer.  Before the close of the same year he had already begun work on

'The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn', published in 1885.  It is

interesting to note the use of the title, the "Duke of Bilgewater," in

Huck Finn when the "Duchess of Bilgewater" had already made her

appearance in 1601.  Sandwiched between his two great masterpieces, Tom

Sawyer and Huck Finn, the writing of 1601 was indeed a strange interlude.



During this prolific period Mark wrote many minor items, most of them

rejected by Howells, and read extensively in one of his favorite books,

Pepys' Diary.  Like many another writer Mark was captivated by Pepys'

style and spirit, and "he determined," says Albert Bigelow Paine in his

'Mark Twain, A Biography', "to try his hand on an imaginary record of

conversation and court manners of a bygone day, written in the phrase of

the period.  The result was 'Fireside Conversation in the Time of Queen

Elizabeth', or as he later called it, '1601'.  The 'conversation'

recorded by a supposed Pepys of that period, was written with all the

outspoken coarseness and nakedness of that rank day, when fireside

sociabilities were limited only to the loosened fancy, vocabulary, and

physical performance, and not by any bounds of convention."



"It was written as a letter," continues Paine, "to that robust divine,

Rev. Joseph Twichell, who, unlike Howells, had no scruples about Mark's

'Elizabethan breadth of parlance.'"



The Rev.  Joseph Twichell, Mark's most intimate friend for over forty

years, was pastor of the Asylum Hill Congregational Church of Hartford,

which Mark facetiously called the "Church of the Holy Speculators,"

because of its wealthy parishioners.  Here Mark had first met "Joe" at a

social, and their meeting ripened into a glorious, life long friendship.

Twichell was a man of about Mark's own age, a profound scholar, a devout

Christian, "yet a man with an exuberant sense of humor, and a profound

understanding of the frailties of mankind."  The Rev. Mr. Twichell

performed the marriage ceremony for Mark Twain and solemnized the births

of his children; "Joe," his friend, counseled him on literary as well as

personal matters for the remainder of Mark's life.  It is important to

catch this brief glimpse of the man for whom this masterpiece was

written, for without it one can not fully understand the spirit in which

1601 was written, or the keen enjoyment which Mark and "Joe" derived from

it.





"SAVE ME ONE."



The story of the first issue of 1601 is one of finesse, state diplomacy,

and surreptitious printing.



The Rev. "Joe" Twichell, for whose delectation the piece had been

written, apparently had pocketed the document for four long years.  Then,

in 1880, it came into the hands of John Hay, later Secretary of State,

presumably sent to him by Mark Twain.  Hay pronounced the sketch a

masterpiece, and wrote immediately to his old Cleveland friend, Alexander

Gunn, prince of connoisseurs in art and literature.  The following

correspondence reveals the fine diplomacy which made the name of John Hay

known throughout the world.





                          DEPARTMENT OF STATE

                               Washington



                                                       June 21, 1880.

Dear Gunn:



Are you in Cleveland for all this week?  If you will say yes by return

mail, I have a masterpiece to submit to your consideration which is only

in my hands for a few days.



Yours, very much worritted by the depravity of Christendom,



                                        Hay





The second letter discloses Hay's own high opinion of the effort and his

deep concern for its safety.







                                                       June 24, 1880

My dear Gunn:



Here it is.  It was written by Mark Twain in a serious effort to bring

back our literature and philosophy to the sober and chaste Elizabethan

standard.  But the taste of the present day is too corrupt for anything

so classic.  He has not yet been able even to find a publisher.  The

Globe has not yet recovered from Downey's inroad, and they won't touch

it.



I send it to you as one of the few lingering relics of that race of

appreciative critics, who know a good thing when they see it.



Read it with reverence and gratitude and send it back to me; for Mark is

impatient to see once more his wandering offspring.



                                        Yours,

                                                  Hay.





In his third letter one can almost hear Hay's chuckle in the certainty

that his diplomatic, if somewhat wicked, suggestion would bear fruit.





                                                       Washington, D. C.

                                                       July 7, 1880

My dear Gunn:



I have your letter, and the proposition which you make to pull a few

proofs of the masterpiece is highly attractive, and of course highly

immoral.  I cannot properly consent to it, and I am afraid the great many

would think I was taking an unfair advantage of his confidence.  Please

send back the document as soon as you can, and if, in spite of my

prohibition, you take these proofs, save me one.



                              Very truly yours,

                                             John Hay.







Thus was this Elizabethan dialogue poured into the moulds of cold type.

According to Merle Johnson, Mark Twain's bibliographer, it was issued in

pamphlet form, without wrappers or covers; there were 8 pages of text and

the pamphlet measured 7 by 8 1/2 inches.  Only four copies are believed to

have been printed, one for Hay, one for Gunn, and two for Twain.



"In the matter of humor," wrote Clemens, referring to Hay's delicious

notes, "what an unsurpassable touch John Hay had!"





HUMOR AT WEST POINT



The first printing of 1601 in actual book form was "Donne at ye Academie

Press," in 1882, West Point, New York, under the supervision of Lieut.  C.

E. S. Wood, then adjutant of the U. S. Military Academy.



In 1882 Mark Twain and Joe Twichell visited their friend Lieut. Wood at

West Point, where they learned that Wood, as Adjutant, had under his

control a small printing establishment.  On Mark's return to Hartford,

Wood received a letter asking if he would do Mark a great favor by

printing something he had written, which he did not care to entrust to

the ordinary printer.  Wood replied that he would be glad to oblige.

On April 3, 1882, Mark sent the manuscript:



"I enclose the original of 1603 [sic] as you suggest.  I am afraid there

are errors in it, also, heedlessness in antiquated spelling--e's stuck on

often at end of words where they are not strickly necessary, etc.....

I would go through the manuscript but I am too much driven just now, and

it is not important anyway.  I wish you would do me the kindness to make

any and all corrections that suggest themselves to you.



                                   "Sincerely yours,

                                             "S.  L.  Clemens."





Charles Erskine Scott Wood recalled in a foreword, which he wrote for the

limited edition of 1601 issued by the Grabhorn Press, how he felt when he

first saw the original manuscript.  "When I read it," writes Wood,

"I felt that the character of it would be carried a little better by a

printing which pretended to the eye that it was contemporaneous with the

pretended 'conversation.'



"I wrote Mark that for literary effect I thought there should be a

species of forgery, though of course there was no effort to actually

deceive a scholar.  Mark answered that I might do as I liked;--that his

only object was to secure a number of copies, as the demand for it was

becoming burdensome, but he would be very grateful for any interest I

brought to the doing.



"Well, Tucker [foreman of the printing shop] and I soaked some handmade

linen paper in weak coffee, put it as a wet bundle into a warm room to

mildew, dried it to a dampness approved by Tucker and he printed the

'copy' on a hand press.  I had special punches cut for such Elizabethan

abbreviations as the a, e, o and u, when followed by m or n--and for the

(commonly and stupidly pronounced ye).



"The only editing I did was as to the spelling and a few old English

words introduced.  The spelling, if I remember correctly, is mine, but

the text is exactly as written by Mark.  I wrote asking his view of

making the spelling of the period and he was enthusiastic--telling me to

do whatever I thought best and he was greatly pleased with the result."



Thus was printed in a de luxe edition of fifty copies the most curious

masterpiece of American humor, at one of America's most dignified

institutions, the United States Military Academy at West Point.



"1601 was so be-praised by the archaeological scholars of a quarter of a

century ago," wrote Clemens in his letter to Charles Orr, "that I was

rather inordinately vain of it.  At that time it had been privately

printed in several countries, among them Japan.  A sumptuous edition on

large paper, rough-edged, was made by Lieut. C. E. S. Wood at West Point

--an edition of 50 copies--and distributed among popes and kings and such

people.  In England copies of that issue were worth twenty guineas when I

was there six years ago, and none to be had."





FROM THE DEPTHS



Mark Twain's irreverence should not be misinterpreted: it was an

irreverence which bubbled up from a deep, passionate insight into the

well-springs of human nature.  In 1601, as in 'The Man That Corrupted

Hadleyburg,' and in 'The Mysterious Stranger,' he tore the masks off

human beings and left them cringing before the public view.  With the

deftness of a master surgeon Clemens dealt with human emotions and

delighted in exposing human nature in the raw.



The spirit and the language of the Fireside Conversation were rooted deep

in Mark Twain's nature and in his life, as C. E. S. Wood, who printed

1601 at West Point, has pertinently observed,



"If I made a guess as to the intellectual ferment out of which 1601 rose

I would say that Mark's intellectual structure and subconscious graining

was from Anglo-Saxons as primitive as the common man of the Tudor period.

He came from the banks of the Mississippi--from the flatboatmen, pilots,

roustabouts, farmers and village folk of a rude, primitive people--as

Lincoln did.



"He was finished in the mining camps of the West among stage drivers,

gamblers and the men of '49.  The simple roughness of a frontier people

was in his blood and brain.



"Words vulgar and offensive to other ears were a common language to him.

Anyone who ever knew Mark heard him use them freely, forcibly,

picturesquely in his unrestrained conversation.  Such language is

forcible as all primitive words are.  Refinement seems to make for

weakness--or let us say a cutting edge--but the old vulgar monosyllabic

words bit like the blow of a pioneer's ax--and Mark was like that.  Then

I think 1601 came out of Mark's instinctive humor, satire and hatred of

puritanism.  But there is more than this; with all its humor there is a

sense of real delight in what may be called obscenity for its own sake.

Whitman and the Bible are no more obscene than Nature herself--no more

obscene than a manure pile, out of which come roses and cherries.  Every

word used in 1601 was used by our own rude pioneers as a part of their

vocabulary--and no word was ever invented by man with obscene intent, but

only as language to express his meaning.  No act of nature is obscene in

itself--but when such words and acts are dragged in for an ulterior

purpose they become offensive, as everything out of place is offensive.

I think he delighted, too, in shocking--giving resounding slaps on what

Chaucer would quite simply call 'the bare erse.'"



Quite aside from this Chaucerian "erse" slapping, Clemens had also a

semi-serious purpose, that of reproducing a past time as he saw it in

Shakespeare, Dekker, Jonson, and other writers of the Elizabethan era.

Fireside Conversation was an exercise in scholarship illumined by a keen

sense of character.  It was made especially effective by the artistic

arrangement of widely-gathered material into a compressed picture of a

phase of the manners and even the minds of the men and women "in the

spacious times of great Elizabeth."



Mark Twain made of 1601 a very smart and fascinating performance, carried

over almost to grotesqueness just to show it was not done for mere

delight in the frank naturalism of the functions with which it deals.

That Mark Twain had made considerable study of this frankness is apparent

from chapter four of 'A Yankee At King Arthur's Court,' where he refers

to the conversation at the famous Round Table thus:



"Many of the terms used in the most matter-of-fact way by this great

assemblage of the first ladies and gentlemen of the land would have made

a Comanche blush.  Indelicacy is too mild a term to convey the idea.

However, I had read Tom Jones and Roderick Random and other books of that

kind and knew that the highest and first ladies and gentlemen in England

had remained little or no cleaner in their talk, and in the morals and

conduct which such talk implies, clear up to one hundred years ago; in

fact clear into our own nineteenth century--in which century, broadly

speaking, the earliest samples of the real lady and the real gentleman

discoverable in English history,--or in European history, for that

matter--may be said to have made their appearance.  Suppose Sir Walter

[Scott] instead of putting the conversation into the mouths of his

characters, had allowed the characters to speak for themselves?  We

should have had talk from Rebecca and Ivanhoe and the soft lady Rowena

which would embarrass a tramp in our day.  However, to the unconsciously

indelicate all things are delicate."



Mark Twain's interest in history and in the depiction of historical

periods and characters is revealed through his fondness for historical

reading in preference to fiction, and through his other historical

writings.  Even in the hilarious, youthful days in San Francisco, Paine

reports that "Clemens, however, was never quite ready for sleep.  Then,

as ever, he would prop himself up in bed, light his pipe, and lose

himself in English or French history until his sleep conquered."  Paine

tells us, too, that Lecky's 'European Morals' was an old favorite.



The notes to 'The Prince and the Pauper' show again how carefully Clemens

examined his historical background, and his interest in these materials.

Some of the more important sources are noted: Hume's 'History of

England', Timbs' 'Curiosities of London', J. Hammond Trumbull's 'Blue

Laws, True and False'.  Apparently Mark Twain relished it, for as Bernard

DeVoto points out, "The book is always Mark Twain.  Its parodies of Tudor

speech lapse sometimes into a callow satisfaction in that idiom--Mark

hugely enjoys his nathlesses and beshrews and marrys."  The writing of

1601 foreshadows his fondness for this treatment.



     "Do you suppose the liberties and the Brawn of These States have to

     do only with delicate lady-words?  with gloved gentleman words"

                              Walt Whitman, 'An American Primer'.



Although 1601 was not matched by any similar sketch in his published

works, it was representative of Mark Twain the man.  He was no emaciated

literary tea-tosser.  Bronzed and weatherbeaten son of the West, Mark was

a man's man, and that significant fact is emphasized by the several

phases of Mark's rich life as steamboat pilot, printer, miner, and

frontier journalist.



On the Virginia City Enterprise Mark learned from editor R. M. Daggett

that "when it was necessary to call a man names, there were no expletives

too long or too expressive to be hurled in rapid succession to emphasize

the utter want of character of the man assailed....  There were

typesetters there who could hurl anathemas at bad copy which would have

frightened a Bengal tiger.  The news editor could damn a mutilated

dispatch in twenty-four languages."



In San Francisco in the sizzling sixties we catch a glimpse of Mark Twain

and his buddy, Steve Gillis, pausing in doorways to sing "The Doleful

Ballad of the Neglected Lover," an old piece of uncollected erotica.

One morning, when a dog began to howl, Steve awoke "to find his room-mate

standing in the door that opened out into a back garden, holding a big

revolver, his hand shaking with cold and excitement," relates Paine in

his Biography.



"'Come here, Steve,' he said.  'I'm so chilled through I can't get a bead

on him.'



"'Sam,' said Steve, 'don't shoot him.  Just swear at him.  You can easily

kill him at any range with your profanity.'



"Steve Gillis declares that Mark Twain let go such a scorching, singeing

blast that the brute's owner sold him the next day for a Mexican hairless

dog."



Nor did Mark's "geysers of profanity" cease spouting after these gay and

youthful days in San Francisco.  With Clemens it may truly be said that

profanity was an art--a pyrotechnic art that entertained nations.



"It was my duty to keep buttons on his shirts," recalled Katy Leary,

life-long housekeeper and friend in the Clemens menage, "and he'd swear

something terrible if I didn't.  If he found a shirt in his drawer

without a button on, he'd take every single shirt out of that drawer and

throw them right out of the window, rain or shine--out of the bathroom

window they'd go.  I used to look out every morning to see the

snowflakes--anything white.  Out they'd fly....  Oh! he'd swear at

anything when he was on a rampage.  He'd swear at his razor if it didn't

cut right, and Mrs. Clemens used to send me around to the bathroom door

sometimes to knock and ask him what was the matter.  Well, I'd go and

knock; I'd say, 'Mrs.  Clemens wants to know what's the matter.'  And

then he'd say to me (kind of low) in a whisper like, 'Did she hear me

Katy?'  'Yes,' I'd say, 'every word.'  Oh, well, he was ashamed then, he

was afraid of getting scolded for swearing like that, because Mrs.

Clemens hated swearing."  But his swearing never seemed really bad to

Katy Leary, "It was sort of funny, and a part of him, somehow," she said.

"Sort of amusing it was--and gay--not like real swearing, 'cause he swore

like an angel."



In his later years at Stormfield Mark loved to play his favorite

billiards.  "It was sometimes a wonderful and fearsome thing to watch Mr.

Clemens play billiards," relates Elizabeth Wallace.  "He loved the game,

and he loved to win, but he occasionally made a very bad stroke, and then

the varied, picturesque, and unorthodox vocabulary, acquired in his more

youthful years, was the only thing that gave him comfort.  Gently,

slowly, with no profane inflexions of voice, but irresistibly as though

they had the headwaters of the Mississippi for their source, came this

stream of unholy adjectives and choice expletives."



Mark's vocabulary ran the whole gamut of life itself.  In Paris, in his

appearance in 1879 before the Stomach Club, a jolly lot of gay wags,

Mark's address, reports Paine, "obtained a wide celebrity among the clubs

of the world, though no line of it, not even its title, has ever found

its way into published literature." It is rumored to have been called

"Some Remarks on the Science of Onanism."



In Berlin, Mark asked Henry W.  Fisher to accompany him on an exploration

of the Berlin Royal Library, where the librarian, having learned that

Clemens had been the Kaiser's guest at dinner, opened the secret treasure

chests for the famous visitor.  One of these guarded treasures was a

volume of grossly indecent verses by Voltaire, addressed to Frederick the

Great.  "Too much is enough," Mark is reported to have said, when Fisher

translated some of the verses, "I would blush to remember any of these

stanzas except to tell Krafft-Ebing about them when I get to Vienna."

When Fisher had finished copying a verse for him Mark put it into his

pocket, saying, "Livy [Mark's wife, Olivia] is so busy mispronouncing

German these days she can't even attempt to get at this."



In his letters, too, Howells observed, "He had the Southwestern, the

Lincolnian, the Elizabethan breadth of parlance, which I suppose one

ought not to call coarse without calling one's self prudish; and I was

often hiding away in discreet holes and corners the letters in which he

had loosed his bold fancy to stoop on rank suggestion; I could not bear

to burn them, and I could not, after the first reading, quite bear to

look at them.  I shall best give my feeling on this point by saying that

in it he was Shakespearean."



          "With a nigger squat on her safety-valve"

                         John Hay, Pike County Ballads.



"Is there any other explanation," asks Van Wyck Brooks, "'of his

Elizabethan breadth of parlance?'  Mr.  Howells confesses that he

sometimes blushed over Mark Twain's letters, that there were some which,

to the very day when he wrote his eulogy on his dead friend, he could not

bear to reread.  Perhaps if he had not so insisted, in former years,

while going over Mark Twain's proofs, upon 'having that swearing out in

an instant,' he would never had had cause to suffer from his having

'loosed his bold fancy to stoop on rank suggestion.'  Mark Twain's verbal

Rabelaisianism was obviously the expression of that vital sap which, not

having been permitted to inform his work, had been driven inward and left

thereto ferment.  No wonder he was always indulging in orgies of

forbidden words.  Consider the famous book, 1601, that fireside

conversation in the time of Queen Elizabeth: is there any obsolete verbal

indecency in the English language that Mark Twain has not painstakingly

resurrected and assembled there?  He, whose blood was in constant ferment

and who could not contain within the narrow bonds that had been set for

him the roitous exuberance of his nature, had to have an escape-valve,

and he poured through it a fetid stream of meaningless obscenity--the

waste of a priceless psychic material!"  Thus, Brooks lumps 1601 with

Mark Twain's "bawdry," and interprets it simply as another indication of

frustration.





FIGS FOR FIG LEAVES!



Of course, the writing of such a piece as 1601 raised the question of

freedom of expression for the creative artist.



Although little discussed at that time, it was a question which intensely

interested Mark, and for a fuller appreciation of Mark's position one

must keep in mind the year in which 1601 was written, 1876.  There had

been nothing like it before in American literature; there had appeared no

Caldwells, no Faulkners, no Hemingways.  Victorian England was gushing

Tennyson.  In the United States polite letters was a cult of the Brahmins

of Boston, with William Dean Howells at the helm of the Atlantic.  Louisa

May Alcott published Little Women in 1868-69, and Little Men in 1871.  In

1873 Mark Twain led the van of the debunkers, scraping the gilt off the

lily in the Gilded Age.



In 1880 Mark took a few pot shots at license in Art and Literature in his

Tramp Abroad, "I wonder why some things are?  For instance, Art is

allowed as much indecent license to-day as in earlier times--but the

privileges of Literature in this respect have been sharply curtailed

within the past eighty or ninety years.  Fielding and Smollet could

portray the beastliness of their day in the beastliest language; we have

plenty of foul subjects to deal with in our day, but we are not allowed

to approach them very near, even with nice and guarded forms of speech.

But not so with Art.  The brush may still deal freely with any subject;

however revolting or indelicate.  It makes a body ooze sarcasm at every

pore, to go about Rome and Florence and see what this last generation has

been doing with the statues.  These works, which had stood in innocent

nakedness for ages, are all fig-leaved now.  Yes, every one of them.

Nobody noticed their nakedness before, perhaps; nobody can help noticing

it now, the fig-leaf makes it so conspicuous.  But the comical thing

about it all, is, that the fig-leaf is confined to cold and pallid

marble, which would be still cold and unsuggestive without this sham and

ostentatious symbol of modesty, whereas warm-blooded paintings which do

really need it have in no case been furnished with it.



"At the door of the Ufizzi, in Florence, one is confronted by statues of

a man and a woman, noseless, battered, black with accumulated grime--they

hardly suggest human beings--yet these ridiculous creatures have been

thoughtfully and conscientiously fig-leaved by this fastidious

generation.  You enter, and proceed to that most-visited little gallery

that exists in the world....  and there, against the wall, without

obstructing rag or leaf, you may look your fill upon the foulest, the

vilest, the obscenest picture the world possesses--Titian's Venus.  It

isn't that she is naked and stretched out on a bed--no, it is the

attitude of one of her arms and hand.  If I ventured to describe the

attitude, there would be a fine howl--but there the Venus lies, for

anybody to gloat over that wants to--and there she has a right to lie,

for she is a work of art, and Art has its privileges.  I saw young girls

stealing furtive glances at her; I saw young men gaze long and absorbedly

at her; I saw aged, infirm men hang upon her charms with a pathetic

interest.  How I should like to describe her--just to see what a holy

indignation I could stir up in the world--just to hear the unreflecting

average man deliver himself about my grossness and coarseness, and all

that.



"In every gallery in Europe there are hideous pictures of blood, carnage,

oozing brains, putrefaction--pictures portraying intolerable suffering

--pictures alive with every conceivable horror, wrought out in dreadful

detail--and similar pictures are being put on the canvas every day and

publicly exhibited--without a growl from anybody--for they are innocent,

they are inoffensive, being works of art.  But suppose a literary artist

ventured to go into a painstaking and elaborate description of one of

these grisly things--the critics would skin him alive.  Well, let it go,

it cannot be helped; Art retains her privileges, Literature has lost

hers.  Somebody else may cipher out the whys and the wherefores and the

consistencies of it--I haven't got time."





PROFESSOR SCENTS PORNOGRAPHY



Unfortunately, 1601 has recently been tagged by Professor Edward

Wagenknecht as "the most famous piece of pornography in American

literature."  Like many another uninformed, Prof. W. is like the little

boy who is shocked to see "naughty" words chalked on the back fence,

and thinks they are pornography.  The initiated, after years of wading

through the mire, will recognize instantly the significant difference

between filthy filth and funny "filth."  Dirt for dirt's sake is

something else again.  Pornography, an eminent American jurist has

pointed out, is distinguished by the "leer of the sensualist."



"The words which are criticised as dirty," observed justice John M.

Woolsey in the United States District Court of New York, lifting the ban

on Ulysses by James Joyce, "are old Saxon words known to almost all men

and, I venture, to many women, and are such words as would be naturally

and habitually used, I believe, by the types of folk whose life, physical

and mental, Joyce is seeking to describe."  Neither was there

"pornographic intent," according to justice Woolsey, nor was Ulysses

obscene within the legal definition of that word.



"The meaning of the word 'obscene,'" the Justice indicated, "as legally

defined by the courts is: tending to stir the sex impulses or to lead to

sexually impure and lustful thoughts.



"Whether a particular book would tend to excite such impulses and

thoughts must be tested by the court's opinion as to its effect on a

person with average sex instincts--what the French would call 'l'homme

moyen sensuel'--who plays, in this branch of legal inquiry, the same role

of hypothetical reagent as does the 'reasonable man' in the law of torts

and 'the learned man in the art' on questions of invention in patent

law."



Obviously, it is ridiculous to say that the "leer of the sensualist"

lurks in the pages of Mark Twain's 1601.





DROLL STORY



"In a way," observed William Marion Reedy, "1601 is to Twain's whole

works what the 'Droll Stories' are to Balzac's.  It is better than the

privately circulated ribaldry and vulgarity of Eugene Field; is, indeed,

an essay in a sort of primordial humor such as we find in Rabelais, or in

the plays of some of the lesser stars that drew their light from

Shakespeare's urn.  It is humor or fun such as one expects, let us say,

from the peasants of Thomas Hardy, outside of Hardy's books.  And, though

it be filthy, it yet hath a splendor of mere animalism of good spirits...

I would say it is scatalogical rather than erotic, save for one touch

toward the end.  Indeed, it seems more of Rabelais than of Boccaccio or

Masuccio or Aretino--is brutally British rather than lasciviously

latinate, as to the subjects, but sumptuous as regards the language."



Immediately upon first reading, John Hay, later Secretary of State, had

proclaimed 1601 a masterpiece.  Albert Bigelow Paine, Mark Twain's

biographer, likewise acknowledged its greatness, when he said, "1601 is a

genuine classic, as classics of that sort go.  It is better than the

gross obscenities of Rabelais, and perhaps in some day to come, the taste

that justified Gargantua and the Decameron will give this literary

refugee shelter and setting among the more conventional writing of Mark

Twain.  Human taste is a curious thing; delicacy is purely a matter of

environment and point of view."



"It depends on who writes a thing whether it is coarse or not," wrote

Clemens in his notebook in 1879.  "I built a conversation which could

have happened--I used words such as were used at that time--1601.  I sent

it anonymously to a magazine, and how the editor abused it and the

sender!"



But that man was a praiser of Rabelais and had been saying, 'O that we

had a Rabelais!' I judged that I could furnish him one.



"Then I took it to one of the greatest, best and most learned of Divines

[Rev. Joseph H. Twichell] and read it to him.  He came within an ace of

killing himself with laughter (for between you and me the thing was

dreadfully funny.  I don't often write anything that I laugh at myself,

but I can hardly think of that thing without laughing).  That old Divine

said it was a piece of the finest kind of literary art--and David Gray of

the Buffalo Courier said it ought to be printed privately and left behind

me when I died, and then my fame as a literary artist would last."



FRANKLIN J. MEINE











THE FIRST PRINTING

     Verbatim Reprint





[Date, 1601.]



CONVERSATION, AS IT WAS BY THE SOCIAL FIRESIDE, IN THE TIME OF THE

TUDORS.



[Mem.--The following is supposed to be an extract from the diary of the

Pepys of that day, the same being Queen Elizabeth's cup-bearer.  He is

supposed to be of ancient and noble lineage; that he despises these

literary canaille; that his soul consumes with wrath, to see the queen

stooping to talk with such; and that the old man feels that his nobility

is defiled by contact with Shakespeare, etc., and yet he has got to stay

there till her Majesty chooses to dismiss him.]







YESTERNIGHT

toke her maiste ye queene a fantasie such as she sometimes hath, and had

to her closet certain that doe write playes, bokes, and such like, these

being my lord Bacon, his worship Sir Walter Ralegh, Mr. Ben Jonson, and

ye child Francis Beaumonte, which being but sixteen, hath yet turned his

hand to ye doing of ye Lattin masters into our Englishe tong, with grete

discretion and much applaus.  Also came with these ye famous Shaxpur.  A

righte straunge mixing truly of mighty blode with mean, ye more in

especial since ye queenes grace was present, as likewise these following,

to wit: Ye Duchess of Bilgewater, twenty-two yeres of age; ye Countesse

of Granby, twenty-six; her doter, ye Lady Helen, fifteen; as also these

two maides of honor, to-wit, ye Lady Margery Boothy, sixty-five, and ye

Lady Alice Dilberry, turned seventy, she being two yeres ye queenes

graces elder.



I being her maites cup-bearer, had no choice but to remaine and beholde

rank forgot, and ye high holde converse wh ye low as uppon equal termes,

a grete scandal did ye world heare thereof.



In ye heat of ye talk it befel yt one did breake wind, yielding an

exceding mightie and distresfull stink, whereat all did laugh full sore,

and then--



Ye Queene.--Verily in mine eight and sixty yeres have I not heard the

fellow to this fart.  Meseemeth, by ye grete sound and clamour of it, it

was male; yet ye belly it did lurk behinde shoulde now fall lean and flat

against ye spine of him yt hath bene delivered of so stately and so waste

a bulk, where as ye guts of them yt doe quiff-splitters bear, stand

comely still and rounde.  Prithee let ye author confess ye offspring.

Will my Lady Alice testify?



Lady Alice.--Good your grace, an' I had room for such a thundergust

within mine ancient bowels, 'tis not in reason I coulde discharge ye same

and live to thank God for yt He did choose handmaid so humble whereby to

shew his power.  Nay, 'tis not I yt have broughte forth this rich

o'ermastering fog, this fragrant gloom, so pray you seeke ye further.



Ye Queene.--Mayhap ye Lady Margery hath done ye companie this favor?



Lady Margery.--So please you madam, my limbs are feeble wh ye weighte and

drouth of five and sixty winters, and it behoveth yt I be tender unto

them.  In ye good providence of God, an' I had contained this wonder,

forsoothe wolde I have gi'en 'ye whole evening of my sinking life to ye

dribbling of it forth, with trembling and uneasy soul, not launched it

sudden in its matchless might, taking mine own life with violence,

rending my weak frame like rotten rags.  It was not I, your maisty.



Ye Queene.--O' God's name, who hath favored us?  Hath it come to pass yt

a fart shall fart itself?  Not such a one as this, I trow.  Young Master

Beaumont--but no; 'twould have wafted him to heaven like down of goose's

boddy.  'Twas not ye little Lady Helen--nay, ne'er blush, my child;

thoul't tickle thy tender maidenhedde with many a mousie-squeak before

thou learnest to blow a harricane like this.  Wasn't you, my learned and

ingenious Jonson?



Jonson.--So fell a blast hath ne'er mine ears saluted, nor yet a stench

so all-pervading and immortal.  'Twas not a novice did it, good your

maisty, but one of veteran experience--else hadde he failed of

confidence.  In sooth it was not I.



Ye Queene.--My lord Bacon?



Lord Bacon.-Not from my leane entrailes hath this prodigy burst forth, so

please your grace.  Naught doth so befit ye grete as grete performance;

and haply shall ye finde yt 'tis not from mediocrity this miracle hath

issued.



[Tho' ye subjoct be but a fart, yet will this tedious sink of learning

pondrously phillosophize.  Meantime did the foul and deadly stink pervade

all places to that degree, yt never smelt I ye like, yet dare I not to

leave ye presence, albeit I was like to suffocate.]



Ye Queene.--What saith ye worshipful Master Shaxpur?



Shaxpur.--In the great hand of God I stand and so proclaim mine

innocence.  Though ye sinless hosts of heaven had foretold ye coming of

this most desolating breath, proclaiming it a work of uninspired man, its

quaking thunders, its firmament-clogging rottenness his own achievement

in due course of nature, yet had not I believed it; but had said the pit

itself hath furnished forth the stink, and heaven's artillery hath shook

the globe in admiration of it.



[Then was there a silence, and each did turn him toward the worshipful

Sr Walter Ralegh, that browned, embattled, bloody swashbuckler, who

rising up did smile, and simpering say,]



Sr W.--Most gracious maisty, 'twas I that did it, but indeed it was so

poor and frail a note, compared with such as I am wont to furnish, yt in

sooth I was ashamed to call the weakling mine in so august a presence.

It was nothing--less than nothing, madam--I did it but to clear my nether

throat; but had I come prepared, then had I delivered something worthy.

Bear with me, please your grace, till I can make amends.



[Then delivered he himself of such a godless and rock-shivering blast

that all were fain to stop their ears, and following it did come so dense

and foul a stink that that which went before did seem a poor and trifling

thing beside it.  Then saith he, feigning that he blushed and was

confused, I perceive that I am weak to-day, and cannot justice do unto my

powers; and sat him down as who should say, There, it is not much yet he

that hath an arse to spare, let him fellow that, an' he think he can.  By

God, an' I were ye queene, I would e'en tip this swaggering braggart out

o' the court, and let him air his grandeurs and break his intolerable

wind before ye deaf and such as suffocation pleaseth.]



Then fell they to talk about ye manners and customs of many peoples, and

Master Shaxpur spake of ye boke of ye sieur Michael de Montaine, wherein

was mention of ye custom of widows of Perigord to wear uppon ye

headdress, in sign of widowhood, a jewel in ye similitude of a man's

member wilted and limber, whereat ye queene did laugh and say widows in

England doe wear prickes too, but betwixt the thighs, and not wilted

neither, till coition hath done that office for them.  Master Shaxpur did

likewise observe how yt ye sieur de Montaine hath also spoken of a

certain emperor of such mighty prowess that he did take ten maidenheddes

in ye compass of a single night, ye while his empress did entertain two

and twenty lusty knights between her sheetes, yet was not satisfied;

whereat ye merrie Countess Granby saith a ram is yet ye emperor's

superior, sith he wil tup above a hundred yewes 'twixt sun and sun; and

after, if he can have none more to shag, will masturbate until he hath

enrich'd whole acres with his seed.



Then spake ye damned windmill, Sr Walter, of a people in ye uttermost

parts of America, yt capulate not until they be five and thirty yeres of

age, ye women being eight and twenty, and do it then but once in seven

yeres.



Ye Queene.--How doth that like my little Lady Helen?  Shall we send thee

thither and preserve thy belly?



Lady Helen.--Please your highnesses grace, mine old nurse hath told me

there are more ways of serving God than by locking the thighs together;

yet am I willing to serve him yt way too, sith your highnesses grace hath

set ye ensample.



Ye Queene.--God' wowndes a good answer, childe.



Lady Alice.--Mayhap 'twill weaken when ye hair sprouts below ye navel.



Lady Helen.--Nay, it sprouted two yeres syne; I can scarce more than

cover it with my hand now.



Ye Queene.--Hear Ye that, my little Beaumonte?  Have ye not a little

birde about ye that stirs at hearing tell of so sweete a neste?



Beaumonte.--'Tis not insensible, illustrious madam; but mousing owls and

bats of low degree may not aspire to bliss so whelming and ecstatic as is

found in ye downy nests of birdes of Paradise.



Ye Queene.--By ye gullet of God, 'tis a neat-turned compliment.  With

such a tongue as thine, lad, thou'lt spread the ivory thighs of many a

willing maide in thy good time, an' thy cod-piece be as handy as thy

speeche.



Then spake ye queene of how she met old Rabelais when she was turned of

fifteen, and he did tell her of a man his father knew that had a double

pair of bollocks, whereon a controversy followed as concerning the most

just way to spell the word, ye contention running high betwixt ye learned

Bacon and ye ingenious Jonson, until at last ye old Lady Margery,

wearying of it all, saith, 'Gentles, what mattereth it how ye shall spell

the word?  I warrant Ye when ye use your bollocks ye shall not think of

it; and my Lady Granby, be ye content; let the spelling be, ye shall

enjoy the beating of them on your buttocks just the same, I trow.  Before

I had gained my fourteenth year I had learnt that them that would explore

a cunt stop'd not to consider the spelling o't.'



Sr W.--In sooth, when a shift's turned up, delay is meet for naught but

dalliance.  Boccaccio hath a story of a priest that did beguile a maid

into his cell, then knelt him in a corner to pray for grace to be rightly

thankful for this tender maidenhead ye Lord had sent him; but ye abbot,

spying through ye key-hole, did see a tuft of brownish hair with fair

white flesh about it, wherefore when ye priest's prayer was done, his

chance was gone, forasmuch as ye little maid had but ye one cunt, and

that was already occupied to her content.



Then conversed they of religion, and ye mightie work ye old dead Luther

did doe by ye grace of God.  Then next about poetry, and Master Shaxpur

did rede a part of his King Henry IV., ye which, it seemeth unto me,

is not of ye value of an arsefull of ashes, yet they praised it bravely,

one and all.



Ye same did rede a portion of his "Venus and Adonis," to their prodigious

admiration, whereas I, being sleepy and fatigued withal, did deme it but

paltry stuff, and was the more discomforted in that ye blody bucanier had

got his wind again, and did turn his mind to farting with such villain

zeal that presently I was like to choke once more.  God damn this windy

ruffian and all his breed.  I wolde that hell mighte get him.



They talked about ye wonderful defense which old Sr. Nicholas Throgmorton

did make for himself before ye judges in ye time of Mary; which was

unlucky matter to broach, sith it fetched out ye quene with a 'Pity yt

he, having so much wit, had yet not enough to save his doter's

maidenhedde sound for her marriage-bed.'  And ye quene did give ye damn'd

Sr. Walter a look yt made hym wince--for she hath not forgot he was her

own lover it yt olde day.  There was silent uncomfortableness now; 'twas

not a good turn for talk to take, sith if ye queene must find offense in

a little harmless debauching, when pricks were stiff and cunts not loathe

to take ye stiffness out of them, who of this company was sinless;

behold, was not ye wife of Master Shaxpur four months gone with child

when she stood uppe before ye altar?  Was not her Grace of Bilgewater

roger'd by four lords before she had a husband?  Was not ye little Lady

Helen born on her mother's wedding-day?  And, beholde, were not ye Lady

Alice and ye Lady Margery there, mouthing religion, whores from ye

cradle?



In time came they to discourse of Cervantes, and of the new painter,

Rubens, that is beginning to be heard of.  Fine words and dainty-wrought

phrases from the ladies now, one or two of them being, in other days,

pupils of that poor ass, Lille, himself; and I marked how that Jonson and

Shaxpur did fidget to discharge some venom of sarcasm, yet dared they not

in the presence, the queene's grace being ye very flower of ye Euphuists

herself.  But behold, these be they yt, having a specialty, and admiring

it in themselves, be jealous when a neighbor doth essaye it, nor can

abide it in them long.  Wherefore 'twas observable yt ye quene waxed

uncontent; and in time labor'd grandiose speeche out of ye mouth of Lady

Alice, who manifestly did mightily pride herself thereon, did quite

exhauste ye quene's endurance, who listened till ye gaudy speeche was

done, then lifted up her brows, and with vaste irony, mincing saith 'O

shit!' Whereat they alle did laffe, but not ye Lady Alice, yt olde

foolish bitche.



Now was Sr. Walter minded of a tale he once did hear ye ingenious

Margrette of Navarre relate, about a maid, which being like to suffer

rape by an olde archbishoppe, did smartly contrive a device to save her

maidenhedde, and said to him, First, my lord, I prithee, take out thy

holy tool and piss before me; which doing, lo his member felle, and would

not rise again.













                               FOOTNOTES

                              To Frivolity



The historical consistency of 1601 indicates that Twain must have given

the subject considerable thought.  The author was careful to speak only

of men who conceivably might have been in the Virgin Queen's closet and

engaged in discourse with her.





THE CHARACTERS



At this time (1601) Queen Elizabeth was 68 years old.  She speaks of

having talked to "old Rabelais" in her youth.  This might have been

possible as Rabelais died in 1552, when the Queen was 19 years old.



Among those in the party were Shakespeare, at that time 37 years old; Ben

Jonson, 27; and Sir Walter Raleigh, 49.  Beaumont at the time was 17, not

16.  He was admitted as a member of the Inner Temple in 1600, and his

first translations, those from Ovid, were first published in 1602.

Therefore, if one were holding strictly to the year date, neither by age

nor by fame would Beaumont have been eligible to attend such a gathering

of august personages in the year 1601; but the point is unimportant.





THE ELIZABETHAN WRITERS



In the Conversation Shakespeare speaks of Montaigne's Essays.  These were

first published in 1580 and successive editions were issued in the years

following, the third volume being published in 1588.  "In England

Montaigne was early popular.  It was long supposed that the autograph of

Shakespeare in a copy of Florio's translation showed his study of the

Essays.  The autograph has been disputed, but divers passages, and

especially one in The Tempest, show that at first or second hand the poet

was acquainted with the essayist." (Encyclopedia Brittanica.)



The company at the Queen's fireside discoursed of Lilly (or Lyly),

English dramatist and novelist of the Elizabethan era, whose novel,

Euphues, published in two parts, 'Euphues', or the 'Anatomy of Wit'

(1579) and 'Euphues and His England' (1580) was a literary sensation.

It is said to have influenced literary style for more than a quarter of a

century, and traces of its influence are found in Shakespeare.  (Columbia

Encyclopedia).



The introduction of Ben Jonson into the party was wholly appropriate,

if one may call to witness some of Jonson's writings.  The subject under

discussion was one that Jonson was acquainted with, in The Alchemist:





Act. I, Scene I,



FACE:  Believe't I will.



SUBTLE:  Thy worst.  I fart at thee.



DOL COMMON:  Have you your wits?  Why, gentlemen, for love----





Act. 2, Scene I,



SIR EPICURE MAMMON: ....and then my poets, the same that writ so subtly

of the fart, whom I shall entertain still for that subject and again in

Bartholomew Fair



NIGHTENGALE: (sings a ballad)

     Hear for your love, and buy for your money.

     A delicate ballad o' the ferret and the coney.

     A preservative again' the punk's evil.

     Another goose-green starch, and the devil.

     A dozen of divine points, and the godly garter

     The fairing of good counsel, of an ell and three-quarters.

     What is't you buy?

     The windmill blown down by the witche's fart,

     Or Saint George, that, O! did break the dragon's heart.





GOOD OLD ENGLISH CUSTOM



That certain types of English society have not changed materially in

their freedom toward breaking wind in public can be noticed in some

comparatively recent literature.  Frank Harris in My Life, Vol. 2,

Ch. XIII, tells of Lady Marriott, wife of a judge Advocate General,

being compelled to leave her own table, at which she was entertaining Sir

Robert Fowler, then the Lord Mayor of London, because of the suffocating

and nauseating odors there.  He also tells of an instance in parliament,

and of a rather brilliant bon mot spoken upon that occasion.



"While Fowler was speaking Finch-Hatton had shewn signs of restlessness;

towards the end of the speech he had moved some three yards away from the

Baronet.  As soon as Fowler sat down Finch-Hatton sprang up holding his

handkerchief to his nose:



"'Mr. Speaker,' he began, and was at once acknowledged by the Speaker,

for it was a maiden speech, and as such was entitled to precedence by the

courteous custom of the House, 'I know why the Right Honourable Member

from the City did not conclude his speech with a proposal.  The only way

to conclude such a speech appropriately would be with a motion!'"





AEOLIAN CREPITATIONS



But society had apparently degenerated sadly in modern times, and even in

the era of Elizabeth, for at an earlier date it was a serious--nay,

capital--offense to break wind in the presence of majesty.  The Emperor

Claudius, hearing that one who had suppressed the urge while paying him

court had suffered greatly thereby, "intended to issue an edict, allowing

to all people the liberty of giving vent at table to any distension

occasioned by flatulence:"



Martial, too (Book XII, Epigram LXXVII), tells of the embarrassment of

one who broke wind while praying in the Capitol,



"One day, while standing upright, addressing his prayers to Jupiter,

Aethon farted in the Capitol.  Men laughed, but the Father of the Gods,

offended, condemned the guilty one to dine at home for three nights.

Since that time, miserable Aethon, when he wishes to enter the Capitol,

goes first to Paterclius' privies and farts ten or twenty times.  Yet, in

spite of this precautionary crepitation, he salutes Jove with constricted

buttocks."  Martial also (Book IV, Epigram LXXX), ridicules a woman who

was subject to the habit, saying,



"Your Bassa, Fabullus, has always a child at her side, calling it her

darling and her plaything; and yet--more wonder--she does not care for

children.  What is the reason then.  Bassa is apt to fart.  (For which

she could blame the unsuspecting infant.)"



The tale is told, too, of a certain woman who performed an aeolian

crepitation at a dinner attended by the witty Monsignieur Dupanloup,

Bishop of Orleans, and that when, to cover up her lapse, she began to

scrape her feet upon the floor, and to make similar noises, the Bishop

said, "Do not trouble to find a rhyme, Madam!"



Nay, worthier names than those of any yet mentioned have discussed the

matter.  Herodotus tells of one such which was the precursor to the fall

of an empire and a change of dynasty--that which Amasis discharges while

on horseback, and bids the envoy of Apries, King of Egypt, catch and

deliver to his royal master.  Even the exact manner and posture of

Amasis, author of this insult, is described.



St. Augustine (The City of God, XIV:24) cites the instance of a man who

could command his rear trumpet to sound at will, which his learned

commentator fortifies with the example of one who could do so in tune!



Benjamin Franklin, in his "Letter to the Royal Academy of Brussels" has

canvassed suggested remedies for alleviating the stench attendant upon

these discharges:



"My Prize Question therefore should be:  To discover some Drug, wholesome

and--not disagreeable, to be mixed with our common food, or sauces, that

shall render the natural discharges of Wind from our Bodies not only

inoffensive, but agreeable as Perfumes.



"That this is not a Chimerical Project & altogether impossible, may

appear from these considerations.  That we already have some knowledge of

means capable of varying that smell.  He that dines on stale Flesh,

especially with much Addition of Onions, shall be able to afford a stink

that no Company can tolerate; while he that has lived for some time on

Vegetables only, shall have that Breath so pure as to be insensible of

the most delicate Noses; and if he can manage so as to avoid the Report,

he may anywhere give vent to his Griefs, unnoticed.  But as there are

many to whom an entire Vegetable Diet would be inconvenient, & as a

little quick Lime thrown into a Jakes will correct the amazing Quantity

of fetid Air arising from the vast Mass of putrid Matter contained in

such Places, and render it pleasing to the Smell, who knows but that a

little Powder of Lime (or some other equivalent) taken in our Food, or

perhaps a Glass of Lime Water drank at Dinner, may have the same Effect

on the Air produced in and issuing from our Bowels?"



One curious commentary on the text is that Elizabeth should be so fond of

investigating into the authorship of the exhalation in question, when she

was inordinately fond of strong and sweet perfumes; in fact, she was

responsible for the tremendous increase in importations of scents into

England during her reign.





"YE BOKE OF YE SIEUR MICHAEL DE MONTAINE"



There is a curious admixture of error and misunderstanding in this part

of the sketch.  In the first place, the story is borrowed from Montaigne,

where it is told inaccurately, and then further corrupted in the telling.



It was not the good widows of Perigord who wore the phallus upon their

coifs; it was the young married women, of the district near Montaigne's

home, who paraded it to view upon their foreheads, as a symbol, says our

essayist, "of the joy they derived therefrom." If they became widows,

they reversed its position, and covered it up with the rest of their

head-dress.



The "emperor" mentioned was not an emperor; he was Procolus, a native of

Albengue, on the Genoese coast, who, with Bonosus, led the unsuccessful

rebellion in Gaul against Emperor Probus.  Even so keen a commentator as

Cotton has failed to note the error.



The empress (Montaigne does not say "his empress") was Messalina, third

wife of the Emperor Claudius, who was uncle of Caligula and foster-father

to Nero.  Furthermore, in her case the charge is that she copulated with

twenty-five in a single night, and not twenty-two, as appears in the

text.  Montaigne is right in his statistics, if original sources are

correct, whereas the author erred in transcribing the incident.



As for Proculus, it has been noted that he was associated with Bonosus,

who was as renowned in the field of Bacchus as was Proculus in that of

Venus (Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire).  The feat of

Proculus is told in his own words, in Vopiscus, (Hist. Augustine, p. 246)

where he recounts having captured one hundred Sarmatian virgins, and

unmaidened ten of them in one night, together with the happenings

subsequent thereto.



Concerning Messalina, there appears to be no question but that she was a

nymphomaniac, and that, while Empress of Rome, she participated in some

fearful debaucheries.  The question is what to believe, for much that we

have heard about her is almost certainly apocryphal.



The author from whom Montaigne took his facts is the elder Pliny, who,

in his Natural History, Book X, Chapter 83, says, "Other animals become

sated with veneral pleasures; man hardly knows any satiety.  Messalina,

the wife of Claudius Caesar, thinking this a palm quite worthy of an

empress, selected for the purpose of deciding the question, one of the

most notorious women who followed the profession of a hired prostitute;

and the empress outdid her, after continuous intercourse, night and day,

at the twenty-fifth embrace."



But Pliny, notwithstanding his great attainments, was often a retailer of

stale gossip, and in like case was Aurelius Victor, another writer who

heaped much odium on her name.  Again, there is a great hiatus in the

Annals of Tacitus, a true historian, at the period covering the earlier

days of the Empress; while Suetonius, bitter as he may be, is little more

than an anecdotist.  Juvenal, another of her detractors, is a prejudiced

witness, for he started out to satirize female vice, and naturally aimed

at high places.  Dio also tells of Messalina's misdeeds, but his work is

under the same limitations as that of Suetonius.  Furthermore, none but

Pliny mentions the excess under consideration.



However, "where there is much smoke there must be a little fire," and

based upon the superimposed testimony of the writers of the period, there

appears little doubt but that Messalina was a nymphomaniac, that she

prostituted herself in the public stews, naked, and with gilded nipples,

and that she did actually marry her chief adulterer, Silius, while

Claudius was absent at Ostia, and that the wedding was consummated in the

presence of a concourse of witnesses.  This was "the straw that broke the

camel's back."  Claudius hastened back to Rome, Silius was dispatched,

and Messalina, lacking the will-power to destroy herself, was killed when

an officer ran a sword through her abdomen, just as it appeared that

Claudius was about to relent.





"THEN SPAKE YE DAMNED WINDMILL, SIR WALTER"



Raleigh is thoroughly in character here; this observation is quite in

keeping with the general veracity of his account of his travels in

Guiana, one of the most mendacious accounts of adventure ever told.

Naturally, the scholarly researches of Westermarck have failed to

discover this people; perhaps Lady Helen might best be protected among

the Jibaros of Ecuador, where the men marry when approaching forty.



Ben Jonson in his Conversations observed "That Sr. W. Raughlye esteemed

more of fame than of conscience."





YE VIRGIN QUEENE



Grave historians have debated for centuries the pretensions of Elizabeth

to the title, "The Virgin Queen," and it is utterly impossible to dispose

of the issue in a note.  However, the weight of opinion appears to be in

the negative.  Many and great were the difficulties attending the

marriage of a Protestant princess in those troublous times, and Elizabeth

finally announced that she would become wedded to the English nation,

and she wore a ring in token thereof until her death.  However, more or

less open liaisons with Essex and Leicester, as well as a host of lesser

courtiers, her ardent temperament, and her imperious temper, are

indications that cannot be denied in determining any estimate upon the

point in question.



Ben Jonson in his Conversations with William Drummond of Hawthornden

says,



"Queen Elizabeth never saw herself after she became old in a true glass;

they painted her, and sometymes would vermillion her nose.  She had

allwayes about Christmass evens set dice that threw sixes or five, and

she knew not they were other, to make her win and esteame herself

fortunate.  That she had a membrana on her, which made her uncapable of

man, though for her delight she tried many.  At the comming over of

Monsieur, there was a French Chirurgion who took in hand to cut it, yett

fear stayed her, and his death."



It was a subject which again intrigued Clemens when he was abroad with

W. H. Fisher, whom Mark employed to "nose up" everything pertaining to

Queen Elizabeth's manly character.





"'BOCCACCIO HATH A STORY"



The author does not pay any great compliment to Raleigh's memory here.

There is no such tale in all Boccaccio.  The nearest related incident

forms the subject matter of Dineo's novel (the fourth) of the First day

of the Decameron.





OLD SR. NICHOLAS THROGMORTON



The incident referred to appears to be Sir Nicholas Throgmorton's trial

for complicity in the attempt to make Lady Jane Grey Queen of England,

a charge of which he was acquitted.  This so angered Queen Mary that she

imprisoned him in the Tower, and fined the jurors from one to two

thousand pounds each.  Her action terrified succeeding juries, so that

Sir Nicholas's brother was condemned on no stronger evidence than that

which had failed to prevail before.  While Sir Nicholas's defense may

have been brilliant, it must be admitted that the evidence was weak.

He was later released from the Tower, and under Elizabeth was one of a

group of commissioners sent by that princess into Scotland, to foment

trouble with Mary, Queen of Scots.  When the attempt became known,

Elizabeth repudiated the acts of her agents, but Sir Nicholas, having

anticipated this possibility, had sufficient foresight to secure

endorsement of his plan by the Council, and so outwitted Elizabeth, who

was playing a two-faced role, and Cecil, one of the greatest statesmen

who ever held the post of principal minister.  Perhaps it was this

incident to which the company referred, which might in part explain

Elizabeth's rejoinder.  However, he had been restored to confidence ere

this, and had served as ambassador to France.





"TO SAVE HIS DOTER'S MAIDENHEDDE"



Elizabeth Throckmorton (or Throgmorton), daughter of Sir Nicholas, was

one of Elizabeth's maids of honor.  When it was learned that she had been

debauched by Raleigh, Sir Walter was recalled from his command at sea by

the Queen, and compelled to marry the girl.  This was not "in that olde

daie," as the text has it, for it happened only eight years before the

date of this purported "conversation," when Elizabeth was sixty years

old.













PARTIAL BIBLIOGRAPHY



The various printings of 1601 reveal how Mark Twain's 'Fireside

Conversation' has become a part of the American printer's lore.  But more

important, its many printings indicate that it has become a popular bit

of American folklore, particularly for men and women who have a feeling

for Mark Twain.  Apparently it appeals to the typographer, who devotes to

it his worthy art, as well as to the job printer, who may pull a crudely

printed proof.  The gay procession of curious printings of 1601 is unique

in the history of American printing.



Indeed, the story of the various printings of 1601 is almost legendary.

In the days of the "jour." printer, so I am told, well-thumbed copies

were carried from print shop to print shop.  For more than a quarter

century now it has been one of the chief sources of enjoyment for

printers' devils; and many a young rascal has learned about life from

this Fireside Conversation.  It has been printed all over the country,

and if report is to be believed, in foreign countries as well.  Because

of the many surreptitious and anonymous printings it is exceedingly

difficult, if not impossible, to compile a complete bibliography.  Many

printings lack the name of the publisher, the printer, the place or date

of printing.  In many instances some of the data, through the patient

questioning of fellow collectors, has been obtained and supplied.





1.  [Date, 1601.] Conversation, as it was by the Social Fireside, in the

Time of the Tudors.



DESCRIPTION: Pamphlet, pp. [ 1 ]-8, without wrappers or cover, measuring

7x8 inches.  The title is Set in caps. and small caps.



The excessively rare first printing, printed in Cleveland, 1880, at the

instance of Alexander Gunn, friend of John Hay.  Only four copies are

believed to have been printed, of which, it is said now, the only known

copy is located in the Willard S. Morse collection.





2.  Date 1601.  Conversation, as it was by the Social Fireside, in the

time of the Tudors.



(Mem.--The following is supposed to be an extract from the diary of the

Pepys of that day, the same being cup-bearer to Queen Elizabeth.  It is

supposed that he is of ancient and noble lineage; that he despises these

literary canaille; that his soul consumes with wrath to see the Queen

stooping to talk with such; and that the old man feels his nobility

defiled by contact with Shakespeare, etc., and yet he has got to stay

there till Her Majesty chooses to dismiss him.)



DESCRIPTION: Title as above, verso blank; pp. [i]-xi, text; verso p. xi

blank.  About 8 x 10 inches, printed on handmade linen paper soaked in

weak coffee, wrappers.  The title is set in caps and small caps.



COLOPHON: at the foot of p. xi: Done Att Ye Academie Preffe; M DCCC LXXX

II.



The privately printed West Point edition, the first printing of the text

authorized by Mark Twain, of which but fifty copies were printed.  The

story of this printing is fully told in the Introduction.





3.  Conversation As It Was By The Social Fire-side In The Time Of The

Tudors from Ye Diary of Ye Cupbearer to her Maisty Queen Elizabeth.

[design] Imprinted by Ye Puritan Press At Ye Sign of Ye Jolly Virgin

1601.



DESCRIPTION: 2 blank leaves; p. [i] blank, p. [ii] fronds., p. [iii]

title [as above], p. [iv] "Mem.", pp. 1-[25] text, I blank leaf.  4 3/4

by 6 1/4 inches, printed in a modern version of the Caxton black letter

type, on M.B.M.  French handmade paper.  The frontispiece, a woodcut by

A. E. Curtis, is a portrait of the cup-bearer.  Bound in buff-grey

boards, buckram back.  Cover title reads, in pale red ink, Caxton type,

Conversation As It Was By The Social Fire-side In The Time Of The Tudors.

[The Byway Press, Cincinnati, Ohio, 1901, 120 copies.]



Probably the first published edition.



Later, in 1916, a facsimile edition of this printing was published in

Chicago from plates.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of 1601, by Mark Twain













THE FACTS CONCERNING THE RECENT CARNIVAL OF CRIME IN CONNECTICUT



by Mark Twain







I was feeling blithe, almost jocund.  I put a match to my cigar, and just

then the morning's mail was handed in.  The first superscription I

glanced at was in a handwriting that sent a thrill of pleasure through

and through me.  It was Aunt Mary's; and she was the person I loved and

honored most in all the world, outside of my own household.  She had been

my boyhood's idol; maturity, which is fatal to so many enchantments, had

not been able to dislodge her from her pedestal; no, it had only

justified her right to be there, and placed her dethronement permanently

among the impossibilities.  To show how strong her influence over me was,

I will observe that long after everybody else's "do-stop-smoking" had

ceased to affect me in the slightest degree, Aunt Mary could still stir

my torpid conscience into faint signs of life when she touched upon the

matter.  But all things have their limit in this world.  A happy day came

at last, when even Aunt Mary's words could no longer move me.  I was not

merely glad to see that day arrive; I was more than glad--I was grateful;

for when its sun had set, the one alloy that was able to mar my enjoyment

of my aunt's society was gone.  The remainder of her stay with us that

winter was in every way a delight.  Of course she pleaded with me just as

earnestly as ever, after that blessed day, to quit my pernicious habit,

but to no purpose whatever; the moment she opened the subject I at once

became calmly, peacefully, contentedly indifferent--absolutely,

adamantinely indifferent.  Consequently the closing weeks of that

memorable visit melted away as pleasantly as a dream, they were so

freighted for me with tranquil satisfaction.  I could not have enjoyed my

pet vice more if my gentle tormentor had been a smoker herself, and an

advocate of the practice.  Well, the sight of her handwriting reminded me

that I way getting very hungry to see her again.  I easily guessed what I

should find in her letter.  I opened it.  Good! just as I expected; she

was coming!  Coming this very day, too, and by the morning train; I might

expect her any moment.



I said to myself, "I am thoroughly happy and content now.  If my most

pitiless enemy could appear before me at this moment, I would freely

right any wrong I may have done him."



Straightway the door opened, and a shriveled, shabby dwarf entered.  He

was not more than two feet high.  He seemed to be about forty years old.

Every feature and every inch of him was a trifle out of shape; and so,

while one could not put his finger upon any particular part and say,

"This is a conspicuous deformity," the spectator perceived that this

little person was a deformity as a whole--a vague, general, evenly

blended, nicely adjusted deformity.  There was a fox-like cunning in the

face and the sharp little eyes, and also alertness and malice.  And yet,

this vile bit of human rubbish seemed to bear a sort of remote and

ill-defined resemblance to me!  It was dully perceptible in the mean

form, the countenance, and even the clothes, gestures, manner, and

attitudes of the creature.  He was a farfetched, dim suggestion of a

burlesque upon me, a caricature of me in little.  One thing about him

struck me forcibly and most unpleasantly: he was covered all over with a

fuzzy, greenish mold, such as one sometimes sees upon mildewed bread.

The sight of it was nauseating.



He stepped along with a chipper air, and flung himself into a doll's

chair in a very free-and-easy way, without waiting to be asked.  He

tossed his hat into the waste-basket.  He picked up my old chalk pipe

from the floor, gave the stem a wipe or two on his knee, filled the bowl

from the tobacco-box at his side, and said to me in a tone of pert

command:



"Gimme a match!"



I blushed to the roots of my hair; partly with indignation, but mainly

because it somehow seemed to me that this whole performance was very like

an exaggeration of conduct which I myself had sometimes been guilty of in

my intercourse with familiar friends--but never, never with strangers, I

observed to myself.  I wanted to kick the pygmy into the fire, but some

incomprehensible sense of being legally and legitimately under his

authority forced me to obey his order.  He applied the match to the pipe,

took a contemplative whiff or two, and remarked, in an irritatingly

familiar way:



"Seems to me it's devilish odd weather for this time of year."



I flushed again, and in anger and humiliation as before; for the language

was hardly an exaggeration of some that I have uttered in my day, and

moreover was delivered in a tone of voice and with an exasperating drawl

that had the seeming of a deliberate travesty of my style.  Now there is

nothing I am quite so sensitive about as a mocking imitation of my

drawling infirmity of speech.  I spoke up sharply and said:



"Look here, you miserable ash-cat!  you will have to give a little more

attention to your manners, or I will throw you out of the window!"



The manikin smiled a smile of malicious content and security, puffed a

whiff of smoke contemptuously toward me, and said, with a still more

elaborate drawl:



"Come--go gently now; don't put on too many airs with your betters."



This cool snub rasped me all over, but it seemed to subjugate me, too,

for a moment.  The pygmy contemplated me awhile with his weasel eyes,

and then said, in a peculiarly sneering way:



"You turned a tramp away from your door this morning."



I said crustily:



"Perhaps I did, perhaps I didn't.  How do you know?"



"Well, I know.  It isn't any matter how I know."



"Very well.  Suppose I did turn a tramp away from the door--what of it?"



"Oh, nothing; nothing in particular.  Only you lied to him."



"I didn't! That is, I--"



"Yes, but you did; you lied to him."



I felt a guilty pang--in truth, I had felt it forty times before that

tramp had traveled a block from my door--but still I resolved to make a

show of feeling slandered; so I said:



"This is a baseless impertinence.  I said to the tramp--"



"There--wait.  You were about to lie again.  I know what you said to him.

You said the cook was gone down-town and there was nothing left from

breakfast.  Two lies.  You knew the cook was behind the door, and plenty

of provisions behind her."



This astonishing accuracy silenced me; and it filled me with wondering

speculations, too, as to how this cub could have got his information.

Of course he could have culled the conversation from the tramp, but by

what sort of magic had he contrived to find out about the concealed cook?

Now the dwarf spoke again:



"It was rather pitiful, rather small, in you to refuse to read that poor

young woman's manuscript the other day, and give her an opinion as to its

literary value; and she had come so far, too, and so hopefully.  Now

wasn't it?"



I felt like a cur!  And I had felt so every time the thing had recurred

to my mind, I may as well confess.  I flushed hotly and said:



"Look here, have you nothing better to do than prowl around prying into

other people's business?   Did that girl tell you that?"



"Never mind whether she did or not.  The main thing is, you did that

contemptible thing.  And you felt ashamed of it afterward.  Aha! you feel

ashamed of it now!"



This was a sort of devilish glee.  With fiery earnestness I responded:



"I told that girl, in the kindest, gentlest way, that I could not consent

to deliver judgment upon any one's manuscript, because an individual's

verdict was worthless.  It might underrate a work of high merit and lose

it to the world, or it might overrate a trashy production and so open the

way for its infliction upon the world: I said that the great public was

the only tribunal competent to sit in judgment upon a literary effort,

and therefore it must be best to lay it before that tribunal in the

outset, since in the end it must stand or fall by that mighty court's

decision anyway."



"Yes, you said all that.  So you did, you juggling, small-souled

shuffler!  And yet when the happy hopefulness faded out of that poor

girl's face, when you saw her furtively slip beneath her shawl the scroll

she had so patiently and honestly scribbled at--so ashamed of her darling

now, so proud of it before--when you saw the gladness go out of her eyes

and the tears come there, when she crept away so humbly who had come

so--"



"Oh, peace!  peace! peace!  Blister your merciless tongue, haven't all

these thoughts tortured me enough without your coming here to fetch them

back again!"



Remorse! remorse!  It seemed to me that it would eat the very heart out

of me!  And yet that small fiend only sat there leering at me with joy

and contempt, and placidly chuckling.  Presently he began to speak again.

Every sentence was an accusation, and every accusation a truth.  Every

clause was freighted with sarcasm and derision, every slow-dropping word

burned like vitriol.  The dwarf reminded me of times when I had flown at

my children in anger and punished them for faults which a little inquiry

would have taught me that others, and not they, had committed.

He reminded me of how I had disloyally allowed old friends to be traduced

in my hearing, and been too craven to utter a word in their defense.

He reminded me of many dishonest things which I had done; of many which I

had procured to be done by children and other irresponsible persons; of

some which I had planned, thought upon, and longed to do, and been kept

from the performance by fear of consequences only.  With exquisite

cruelty he recalled to my mind, item by item, wrongs and unkindnesses I

had inflicted and humiliations I had put upon friends since dead, "who

died thinking of those injuries, maybe, and grieving over them," he

added, by way of poison to the stab.



"For instance," said he, "take the case of your younger brother, when you

two were boys together, many a long year ago.  He always lovingly trusted

in you with a fidelity that your manifold treacheries were not able to

shake.  He followed you about like a dog, content to suffer wrong and

abuse if he might only be with you; patient under these injuries so long

as it was your hand that inflicted them.  The latest picture you have of

him in health and strength must be such a comfort to you!  You pledged

your honor that if he would let you blindfold him no harm should come to

him; and then, giggling and choking over the rare fun of the joke, you

led him to a brook thinly glazed with ice, and pushed him in; and how you

did laugh!  Man, you will never forget the gentle, reproachful look he

gave you as he struggled shivering out, if you live a thousand years!

Oh! you see it now, you see it now!"



"Beast, I have seen it a million times, and shall see it a million more!

and may you rot away piecemeal, and suffer till doomsday what I suffer

now, for bringing it back to me again!"



The dwarf chuckled contentedly, and went on with his accusing history of

my career.  I dropped into a moody, vengeful state, and suffered in

silence under the merciless lash.  At last this remark of his gave me a

sudden rouse:



"Two months ago, on a Tuesday, you woke up, away in the night, and fell

to thinking, with shame, about a peculiarly mean and pitiful act of yours

toward a poor ignorant Indian in the wilds of the Rocky Mountains in the

winter of eighteen hundred and--"



"Stop a moment, devil!  Stop!  Do you mean to tell me that even my very

thoughts are not hidden from you?"



"It seems to look like that.  Didn't you think the thoughts I have just

mentioned?"



"If I didn't, I wish I may never breathe again!  Look here, friend--look

me in the eye.  Who are you?"



"Well, who do you think?"



"I think you are Satan himself.  I think you are the devil."



"No."



"No?  Then who can you be?"



"Would you really like to know?"



"Indeed I would."



"Well, I am your Conscience!"



In an instant I was in a blaze of joy and exultation.  I sprang at the

creature, roaring:



"Curse you, I have wished a hundred million times that you were tangible,

and that I could get my hands on your throat once!  Oh, but I will wreak

a deadly vengeance on--"



Folly!  Lightning does not move more quickly than my Conscience did!

He darted aloft so suddenly that in the moment my fingers clutched the

empty air he was already perched on the top of the high bookcase, with

his thumb at his nose in token of derision.  I flung the poker at him,

and missed.  I fired the bootjack.  In a blind rage I flew from place to

place, and snatched and hurled any missile that came handy; the storm of

books, inkstands, and chunks of coal gloomed the air and beat about the

manikin's perch relentlessly, but all to no purpose; the nimble figure

dodged every shot; and not only that, but burst into a cackle of

sarcastic and triumphant laughter as I sat down exhausted.  While I

puffed and gasped with fatigue and excitement, my Conscience talked to

this effect:



"My good slave, you are curiously witless--no, I mean characteristically

so.  In truth, you are always consistent, always yourself, always an ass.

Other wise it must have occurred to you that if you attempted this murder

with a sad heart and a heavy conscience, I would droop under the

burdening in influence instantly.  Fool, I should have weighed a ton, and

could not have budged from the floor; but instead, you are so cheerfully

anxious to kill me that your conscience is as light as a feather; hence I

am away up here out of your reach.  I can almost respect a mere ordinary

sort of fool; but you pah!"



I would have given anything, then, to be heavyhearted, so that I could

get this person down from there and take his life, but I could no more be

heavy-hearted over such a desire than I could have sorrowed over its

accomplishment.  So I could only look longingly up at my master, and rave

at the ill luck that denied me a heavy conscience the one only time that

I had ever wanted such a thing in my life.  By and by I got to musing

over the hour's strange adventure, and of course my human curiosity began

to work.  I set myself to framing in my mind some questions for this

fiend to answer.  Just then one of my boys entered, leaving the door open

behind him, and exclaimed:



"My!  what has been going on here?  The bookcase is all one riddle of--"



I sprang up in consternation, and shouted:



"Out of this!  Hurry!  jump!  Fly!  Shut the door!  Quick, or my

Conscience will get away!"



The door slammed to, and I locked it.  I glanced up and was grateful, to

the bottom of my heart, to see that my owner was still my prisoner.  I

said:



"Hang you, I might have lost you!  Children are the heedlessest

creatures.  But look here, friend, the boy did not seem to notice you at

all; how is that?"



"For a very good reason.  I am invisible to all but you."



I made a mental note of that piece of information with a good deal of

satisfaction.  I could kill this miscreant now, if I got a chance, and no

one would know it.  But this very reflection made me so lighthearted that

my Conscience could hardly keep his seat, but was like to float aloft

toward the ceiling like a toy balloon.  I said, presently:



"Come, my Conscience, let us be friendly.  Let us fly a flag of truce for

a while.  I am suffering to ask you some questions."



"Very well.  Begin."



"Well, then, in the first place, why were you never visible to me

before?"



"Because you never asked to see me before; that is, you never asked in

the right spirit and the proper form before.  You were just in the right

spirit this time, and when you called for your most pitiless enemy I was

that person by a very large majority, though you did not suspect it."



"Well, did that remark of mine turn you into flesh and blood?"



"No.  It only made me visible to you.  I am unsubstantial, just as other

spirits are."



This remark prodded me with a sharp misgiving.



If he was unsubstantial, how was I going to kill him?  But I dissembled,

and said persuasively:



"Conscience, it isn't sociable of you to keep at such a distance.  Come

down and take another smoke."



This was answered with a look that was full of derision, and with this

observation added:



"Come where you can get at me and kill me?  The invitation is declined

with thanks."



"All right," said I to myself; "so it seems a spirit can be killed, after

all; there will be one spirit lacking in this world, presently, or I lose

my guess."  Then I said aloud:



"Friend--"



"There; wait a bit.  I am not your friend.  I am your enemy; I am not

your equal, I am your master, Call me 'my lord,' if you please.  You are

too familiar."



"I don't like such titles.  I am willing to call you, sir.  That is as

far as--"



"We will have no argument about this.  Just obey, that is all.  Go on

with your chatter."



"Very well, my lord--since nothing but my lord will suit you--I was going

to ask you how long you will be visible to me?"



"Always!"



I broke out with strong indignation: "This is simply an outrage.  That is

what I think of it!  You have dogged, and dogged, and dogged me, all the

days of my life, invisible.  That was misery enough, now to have such a

looking thing as you tagging after me like another shadow all the rest of

my day is an intolerable prospect.  You have my opinion my lord, make the

most of it."



"My lad, there was never so pleased a conscience in this world as I was

when you made me visible.  It gives me an inconceivable advantage.  Now I

can look you straight in the eye, and call you names, and leer at you,

jeer at you, sneer at you; and you know what eloquence there is in

visible gesture and expression, more especially when the effect is

heightened by audible speech.  I shall always address you henceforth in

your o-w-n  s-n-i-v-e-l-i-n-g  d-r-a-w-l--baby!"



I let fly with the coal-hod.  No result.  My lord said:



"Come, come!  Remember the flag of truce!"



"Ah, I forgot that.  I will try to be civil; and you try it, too, for a

novelty.  The idea of a civil conscience!  It is a good joke; an

excellent joke.  All the consciences I have ever heard of were nagging,

badgering, fault-finding, execrable savages!  Yes; and always in a sweat

about some poor little insignificant trifle or other--destruction catch

the lot of them, I say!  I would trade mine for the smallpox and seven

kinds of consumption, and be glad of the chance.  Now tell me, why is it

that a conscience can't haul a man over the coals once, for an offense,

and then let him alone?  Why is it that it wants to keep on pegging at

him, day and night and night and day, week in and week out, forever and

ever, about the same old thing?  There is no sense in that, and no reason

in it.  I think a conscience that will act like that is meaner than the

very dirt itself."



"Well, WE like it; that suffices."



"Do you do it with the honest intent to improve a man?"



That question produced a sarcastic smile, and this reply:



"No, sir.  Excuse me.  We do it simply because it is 'business.'  It is

our trade.  The purpose of it is to improve the man, but we are merely

disinterested agents.  We are appointed by authority, and haven't

anything to say in the matter.  We obey orders and leave the consequences

where they belong.  But I am willing to admit this much: we do crowd the

orders a trifle when we get a chance, which is most of the time.

We enjoy it.  We are instructed to remind a man a few times of an error;

and I don't mind acknowledging that we try to give pretty good measure.

And when we get hold of a man of a peculiarly sensitive nature, oh, but

we do haze him!  I have consciences to come all the way from China and

Russia to see a person of that kind put through his paces, on a special

occasion.  Why, I knew a man of that sort who had accidentally crippled a

mulatto baby; the news went abroad, and I wish you may never commit

another sin if the consciences didn't flock from all over the earth to

enjoy the fun and help his master exorcise him.  That man walked the

floor in torture for forty-eight hours, without eating or sleeping, and

then blew his brains out.  The child was perfectly well again in three

weeks."



"Well, you are a precious crew, not to put it too strong.  I think I

begin to see now why you have always been a trifle inconsistent with me.

In your anxiety to get all the juice you can out of a sin, you make a man

repent of it in three or four different ways.  For instance, you found

fault with me for lying to that tramp, and I suffered over that.  But it

was only yesterday that I told a tramp the square truth, to wit, that,

it being regarded as bad citizenship to encourage vagrancy, I would give

him nothing.  What did you do then: Why, you made me say to myself, 'Ah,

it would have been so much kinder and more blameless to ease him off with

a little white lie, and send him away feeling that if he could not have

bread, the gentle treatment was at least something to be grateful for!'

Well, I suffered all day about that.  Three days before I had fed a

tramp, and fed him freely, supposing it a virtuous act.  Straight off you

said, 'Oh, false citizen, to have fed a tramp!' and I suffered as usual.

I gave a tramp work; you objected to it--after the contract was made,

of course; you never speak up beforehand.  Next, I refused a tramp work;

you objected to that.  Next, I proposed to kill a tramp; you kept me

awake all night, oozing remorse at every pore.  Sure I was going to be

right this time, I sent the next tramp away with my benediction; and I

wish you may live as long as I do, if you didn't make me smart all night

again because I didn't kill him.  Is there any way of satisfying that

malignant invention which is called a conscience?"



"Ha, ha! this is luxury!  Go on!"



"But come, now, answer me that question.  Is there any way?"



"Well, none that I propose to tell you, my son.  Ass!  I don't care what

act you may turn your hand to, I can straightway whisper a word in your

ear and make you think you have committed a dreadful meanness.  It is my

business--and my joy--to make you repent of everything you do.  If I have

fooled away any opportunities it was not intentional; I beg to assure you

it was not intentional!"



"Don't worry; you haven't missed a trick that I know of.  I never did a

thing in all my life, virtuous or otherwise, that I didn't repent of in

twenty-four hours.  In church last Sunday I listened to a charity sermon.

My first impulse was to give three hundred and fifty dollars; I repented

of that and reduced it a hundred; repented of that and reduced it another

hundred; repented of that and reduced it another hundred; repented of

that and reduced the remaining fifty to twenty-five; repented of that and

came down to fifteen; repented of that and dropped to two dollars and a

half; when the plate came around at last, I repented once more and

contributed ten cents.  Well, when I got home, I did wish to goodness I

had that ten cents back again!  You never did let me get through a

charity sermon without having something to sweat about."



"Oh, and I never shall, I never shall.  You can always depend on me."



"I think so.  Many and many's the restless night I've wanted to take you

by the neck.  If I could only get hold of you now!"



"Yes, no doubt.  But I am not an ass; I am only the saddle of an ass.

But go on, go on.  You entertain me more than I like to confess."



I am glad of that.  (You will not mind my lying a little, to keep in

practice.)  Look here; not to be too personal, I think you are about the

shabbiest and most contemptible little shriveled-up reptile that can be

imagined.  I am grateful enough that you are invisible to other people,

for I should die with shame to be seen with such a mildewed monkey of a

conscience as you are.  Now if you were five or six feet high, and--"



"Oh, come! who is to blame?"



"I don't know."



"Why, you are; nobody else."



"Confound you, I wasn't consulted about your personal appearance."



"I don't care, you had a good deal to do with it, nevertheless.  When you

were eight or nine years old, I was seven feet high, and as pretty as a

picture."



"I wish you had died young!  So you have grown the wrong way, have you?"



"Some of us grow one way and some the other.  You had a large conscience

once; if you've a small conscience now I reckon there are reasons for it.

However, both of us are to blame, you and I.  You see, you used to be

conscientious about a great many things; morbidly so, I may say.  It was

a great many years ago.  You probably do not remember it now.  Well,

I took a great interest in my work, and I so enjoyed the anguish which

certain pet sins of yours afflicted you with that I kept pelting at you

until I rather overdid the matter.  You began to rebel.  Of course I

began to lose ground, then, and shrivel a little--diminish in stature,

get moldy, and grow deformed.  The more I weakened, the more stubbornly

you fastened on to those particular sins; till at last the places on my

person that represent those vices became as callous as shark-skin.  Take

smoking, for instance.  I played that card a little too long, and I lost.

When people plead with you at this late day to quit that vice, that old

callous place seems to enlarge and cover me all over like a shirt of

mail.  It exerts a mysterious, smothering effect; and presently I, your

faithful hater, your devoted Conscience, go sound asleep!  Sound?  It is

no name for it.  I couldn't hear it thunder at such a time.  You have

some few other vices--perhaps eighty, or maybe ninety--that affect me in

much the same way."



"This is flattering; you must be asleep a good part of your time."



"Yes, of late years.  I should be asleep all the time but for the help I

get."



"Who helps you?"



"Other consciences.  Whenever a person whose conscience I am acquainted

with tries to plead with you about the vices you are callous to, I get my

friend to give his client a pang concerning some villainy of his own,

and that shuts off his meddling and starts him off to hunt personal

consolation.  My field of usefulness is about trimmed down to tramps,

budding authoresses, and that line of goods now; but don't you worry

--I'll harry you on theirs while they last!  Just you put your trust in

me."



"I think I can.  But if you had only been good enough to mention these

facts some thirty years ago, I should have turned my particular attention

to sin, and I think that by this time I should not only have had you

pretty permanently asleep on the entire list of human vices, but reduced

to the size of a homeopathic pill, at that.  That is about the style of

conscience I am pining for.  If I only had you shrunk you down to a

homeopathic pill, and could get my hands on you, would I put you in a

glass case for a keepsake?  No, sir.  I would give you to a yellow dog!

That is where you ought to be--you and all your tribe.  You are not fit

to be in society, in my opinion.  Now another question.  Do you know a

good many consciences in this section?"



"Plenty of them."



"I would give anything to see some of them!  Could you bring them here?

And would they be visible to me?"



"Certainly not."



"I suppose I ought to have known that without asking.  But no matter, you

can describe them.  Tell me about my neighbor Thompson's conscience,

please."



"Very well.  I know him intimately; have known him many years.  I knew

him when he was eleven feet high and of a faultless figure.  But he is

very pasty and tough and misshapen now, and hardly ever interests himself

about anything.  As to his present size--well, he sleeps in a cigar-box."



"Likely enough.  There are few smaller, meaner men in this region than

Hugh Thompson.  Do you know Robinson's conscience?"



"Yes.  He is a shade under four and a half feet high; used to be a blond;

is a brunette now, but still shapely and comely."



"Well, Robinson is a good fellow.  Do you know Tom Smith's conscience?"



"I have known him from childhood.  He was thirteen inches high, and

rather sluggish, when he was two years old--as nearly all of us are at

that age.  He is thirty-seven feet high now, and the stateliest figure in

America.  His legs are still racked with growing-pains, but he has a good

time, nevertheless.  Never sleeps.  He is the most active and energetic

member of the New England Conscience Club; is president of it.  Night and

day you can find him pegging away at Smith, panting with his labor,

sleeves rolled up, countenance all alive with enjoyment.  He has got his

victim splendidly dragooned now.  He can make poor Smith imagine that the

most innocent little thing he does is an odious sin; and then he sets to

work and almost tortures the soul out of him about it."



"Smith is the noblest man in all this section, and the purest; and yet is

always breaking his heart because he cannot be good!  Only a conscience

could find pleasure in heaping agony upon a spirit like that.  Do you

know my aunt Mary's conscience?"



"I have seen her at a distance, but am not acquainted with her.  She

lives in the open air altogether, because no door is large enough to

admit her."



"I can believe that.  Let me see.  Do you know the conscience of that

publisher who once stole some sketches of mine for a 'series' of his, and

then left me to pay the law expenses I had to incur in order to choke him

off?"



"Yes.  He has a wide fame.  He was exhibited, a month ago, with some

other antiquities, for the benefit of a recent Member of the Cabinet's

conscience that was starving in exile.  Tickets and fares were high, but

I traveled for nothing by pretending to be the conscience of an editor,

and got in for half-price by representing myself to be the conscience of

a clergyman.  However, the publisher's conscience, which was to have been

the main feature of the entertainment, was a failure--as an exhibition.

He was there, but what of that?  The management had provided a microscope

with a magnifying power of only thirty thousand diameters, and so nobody

got to see him, after all.  There was great and general dissatisfaction,

of course, but--"



Just here there was an eager footstep on the stair; I opened the door,

and my aunt Mary burst into the room.  It was a joyful meeting and a

cheery bombardment of questions and answers concerning family matters

ensued.  By and by my aunt said:



"But I am going to abuse you a little now.  You promised me, the day I

saw you last, that you would look after the needs of the poor family

around the corner as faithfully as I had done it myself.  Well, I found

out by accident that you failed of your promise.  Was that right?"



In simple truth, I never had thought of that family a second time!  And

now such a splintering pang of guilt shot through me!  I glanced up at my

Conscience.  Plainly, my heavy heart was affecting him.  His body was

drooping forward; he seemed about to fall from the bookcase.  My aunt

continued:



"And think how you have neglected my poor protege at the almshouse, you

dear, hard-hearted promise-breaker!"  I blushed scarlet, and my tongue

was tied.  As the sense of my guilty negligence waxed sharper and

stronger, my Conscience began to sway heavily back and forth; and when my

aunt, after a little pause, said in a grieved tone, "Since you never once

went to see her, maybe it will not distress you now to know that that

poor child died, months ago, utterly friendless and forsaken!"

My Conscience could no longer bear up under the weight of my sufferings,

but tumbled headlong from his high perch and struck the floor with a

dull, leaden thump.  He lay there writhing with pain and quaking with

apprehension, but straining every muscle in frantic efforts to get up.

In a fever of expectancy I sprang to the door, locked it, placed my back

against it, and bent a watchful gaze upon my struggling master.  Already

my fingers were itching to begin their murderous work.



"Oh, what can be the matter!" exclaimed by aunt, shrinking from me, and

following with her frightened eyes the direction of mine.  My breath was

coming in short, quick gasps now, and my excitement was almost

uncontrollable.  My aunt cried out:



"Oh, do not look so!  You appal me!  Oh, what can the matter be?  What is

it you see?  Why do you stare so?  Why do you work your fingers like

that?"



"Peace, woman!"  I said, in a hoarse whisper. "Look elsewhere; pay no

attention to me; it is nothing--nothing.  I am often this way.  It will

pass in a moment.  It comes from smoking too much."



My injured lord was up, wild-eyed with terror, and trying to hobble

toward the door.  I could hardly breathe, I was so wrought up.  My aunt

wrung her hands, and said:



"Oh, I knew how it would be; I knew it would come to this at last!

Oh, I implore you to crush out that fatal habit while it may yet be time!

You must not, you shall not be deaf to my supplications longer!"

My struggling Conscience showed sudden signs of weariness!  "Oh, promise

me you will throw off this hateful slavery of tobacco!"  My Conscience

began to reel drowsily, and grope with his hands--enchanting spectacle!

"I beg you, I beseech you, I implore you!  Your reason is deserting you!

There is madness in your eye!  It flames with frenzy!  Oh, hear me, hear

me, and be saved!  See, I plead with you on my very knees!"  As she sank

before me my Conscience reeled again, and then drooped languidly to the

floor, blinking toward me a last supplication for mercy, with heavy eyes.

"Oh, promise, or you are lost!  Promise, and be redeemed!  Promise!

Promise and live!"  With a long-drawn sigh my conquered Conscience closed

his eyes and fell fast asleep!



With an exultant shout I sprang past my aunt, and in an instant I had my

lifelong foe by the throat.  After so many years of waiting and longing,

he was mine at last.  I tore him to shreds and fragments.  I rent the

fragments to bits.  I cast the bleeding rubbish into the fire, and drew

into my nostrils the grateful incense of my burnt-offering.  At last, and

forever, my Conscience was dead!



I was a free man!  I turned upon my poor aunt, who was almost petrified

with terror, and shouted:



"Out of this with your paupers, your charities, your reforms, your

pestilent morals!  You behold before you a man whose life-conflict is

done, whose soul is at peace; a man whose heart is dead to sorrow, dead

to suffering, dead to remorse; a man WITHOUT A CONSCIENCE!  In my joy I

spare you, though I could throttle you and never feel a pang!  Fly!"



She fled.  Since that day my life is all bliss.  Bliss, unalloyed bliss.

Nothing in all the world could persuade me to have a conscience again.

I settled all my old outstanding scores, and began the world anew.

I killed thirty-eight persons during the first two weeks--all of them on

account of ancient grudges.  I burned a dwelling that interrupted my

view.  I swindled a widow and some orphans out of their last cow, which

is a very good one, though not thoroughbred, I believe.  I have also

committed scores of crimes, of various kinds, and have enjoyed my work

exceedingly, whereas it would formerly have broken my heart and turned my

hair gray, I have no doubt.



In conclusion, I wish to state, by way of advertisement, that medical

colleges desiring assorted tramps for scientific purposes, either by the

gross, by cord measurement, or per ton, will do well to examine the lot

in my cellar before purchasing elsewhere, as these were all selected and

prepared by myself, and can be had at a low rate, because I wish to

clear, out my stock and get ready for the spring trade.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Facts Concerning The Recent

Carnival Of Crime In Connecticut, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













                   THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER

                                BY

                            MARK TWAIN

                     (Samuel Langhorne Clemens)









                           P R E F A C E



MOST of the adventures recorded in this book really occurred; one or

two were experiences of my own, the rest those of boys who were

schoolmates of mine. Huck Finn is drawn from life; Tom Sawyer also, but

not from an individual--he is a combination of the characteristics of

three boys whom I knew, and therefore belongs to the composite order of

architecture.



The odd superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children

and slaves in the West at the period of this story--that is to say,

thirty or forty years ago.



Although my book is intended mainly for the entertainment of boys and

girls, I hope it will not be shunned by men and women on that account,

for part of my plan has been to try to pleasantly remind adults of what

they once were themselves, and of how they felt and thought and talked,

and what queer enterprises they sometimes engaged in.



                                                            THE AUTHOR.



HARTFORD, 1876.







                          T O M   S A W Y E R







CHAPTER I



"TOM!"



No answer.



"TOM!"



No answer.



"What's gone with that boy,  I wonder? You TOM!"



No answer.



The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them about the

room; then she put them up and looked out under them. She seldom or

never looked THROUGH them for so small a thing as a boy; they were her

state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for "style," not

service--she could have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well.

She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not fiercely, but

still loud enough for the furniture to hear:



"Well, I lay if I get hold of you I'll--"



She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching

under the bed with the broom, and so she needed breath to punctuate the

punches with. She resurrected nothing but the cat.



"I never did see the beat of that boy!"



She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the

tomato vines and "jimpson" weeds that constituted the garden. No Tom.

So she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and

shouted:



"Y-o-u-u TOM!"



There was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to

seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight.



"There! I might 'a' thought of that closet. What you been doing in

there?"



"Nothing."



"Nothing! Look at your hands. And look at your mouth. What IS that

truck?"



"I don't know, aunt."



"Well, I know. It's jam--that's what it is. Forty times I've said if

you didn't let that jam alone I'd skin you. Hand me that switch."



The switch hovered in the air--the peril was desperate--



"My! Look behind you, aunt!"



The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of danger. The

lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and

disappeared over it.



His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle

laugh.



"Hang the boy, can't I never learn anything? Ain't he played me tricks

enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time? But old

fools is the biggest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks,

as the saying is. But my goodness, he never plays them alike, two days,

and how is a body to know what's coming? He 'pears to know just how

long he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he

can make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down

again and I can't hit him a lick. I ain't doing my duty by that boy,

and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows. Spare the rod and spile

the child, as the Good Book says. I'm a laying up sin and suffering for

us both, I know. He's full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me! he's my

own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash

him, somehow. Every time I let him off, my conscience does hurt me so,

and every time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well-a-well, man

that is born of woman is of few days and full of trouble, as the

Scripture says, and I reckon it's so. He'll play hookey this evening, *

and [* Southwestern for "afternoon"] I'll just be obleeged to make him

work, to-morrow, to punish him. It's mighty hard to make him work

Saturdays, when all the boys is having holiday, but he hates work more

than he hates anything else, and I've GOT to do some of my duty by him,

or I'll be the ruination of the child."



Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time. He got back home

barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's

wood and split the kindlings before supper--at least he was there in

time to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did three-fourths of the

work. Tom's younger brother (or rather half-brother) Sid was already

through with his part of the work (picking up chips), for he was a

quiet boy, and had no adventurous, troublesome ways.



While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity

offered, Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile, and

very deep--for she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments. Like

many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she

was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she

loved to contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low

cunning. Said she:



"Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn't it?"



"Yes'm."



"Powerful warm, warn't it?"



"Yes'm."



"Didn't you want to go in a-swimming, Tom?"



A bit of a scare shot through Tom--a touch of uncomfortable suspicion.

He searched Aunt Polly's face, but it told him nothing. So he said:



"No'm--well, not very much."



The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said:



"But you ain't too warm now, though." And it flattered her to reflect

that she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing

that that was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew

where the wind lay, now. So he forestalled what might be the next move:



"Some of us pumped on our heads--mine's damp yet. See?"



Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of

circumstantial evidence, and missed a trick. Then she had a new

inspiration:



"Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to

pump on your head, did you? Unbutton your jacket!"



The trouble vanished out of Tom's face. He opened his jacket. His

shirt collar was securely sewed.



"Bother! Well, go 'long with you. I'd made sure you'd played hookey

and been a-swimming. But I forgive ye, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of a

singed cat, as the saying is--better'n you look. THIS time."



She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom

had stumbled into obedient conduct for once.



But Sidney said:



"Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread,

but it's black."



"Why, I did sew it with white! Tom!"



But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the door he said:



"Siddy, I'll lick you for that."



In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into

the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them--one needle

carried white thread and the other black. He said:



"She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid. Confound it! sometimes

she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to

geeminy she'd stick to one or t'other--I can't keep the run of 'em. But

I bet you I'll lam Sid for that. I'll learn him!"



He was not the Model Boy of the village. He knew the model boy very

well though--and loathed him.



Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles.

Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him

than a man's are to a man, but because a new and powerful interest bore

them down and drove them out of his mind for the time--just as men's

misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises. This

new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just

acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practise it undisturbed.

It consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble,

produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short

intervals in the midst of the music--the reader probably remembers how

to do it, if he has ever been a boy. Diligence and attention soon gave

him the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his mouth full

of harmony and his soul full of gratitude. He felt much as an

astronomer feels who has discovered a new planet--no doubt, as far as

strong, deep, unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with

the boy, not the astronomer.



The summer evenings were long. It was not dark, yet. Presently Tom

checked his whistle. A stranger was before him--a boy a shade larger

than himself. A new-comer of any age or either sex was an impressive

curiosity in the poor little shabby village of St. Petersburg. This boy

was well dressed, too--well dressed on a week-day. This was simply

astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth

roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons. He had shoes

on--and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a bright bit of

ribbon. He had a citified air about him that ate into Tom's vitals. The

more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his

nose at his finery and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed

to him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the other moved--but

only sidewise, in a circle; they kept face to face and eye to eye all

the time. Finally Tom said:



"I can lick you!"



"I'd like to see you try it."



"Well, I can do it."



"No you can't, either."



"Yes I can."



"No you can't."



"I can."



"You can't."



"Can!"



"Can't!"



An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said:



"What's your name?"



"'Tisn't any of your business, maybe."



"Well I 'low I'll MAKE it my business."



"Well why don't you?"



"If you say much, I will."



"Much--much--MUCH. There now."



"Oh, you think you're mighty smart, DON'T you? I could lick you with

one hand tied behind me, if I wanted to."



"Well why don't you DO it? You SAY you can do it."



"Well I WILL, if you fool with me."



"Oh yes--I've seen whole families in the same fix."



"Smarty! You think you're SOME, now, DON'T you? Oh, what a hat!"



"You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare you to knock it

off--and anybody that'll take a dare will suck eggs."



"You're a liar!"



"You're another."



"You're a fighting liar and dasn't take it up."



"Aw--take a walk!"



"Say--if you give me much more of your sass I'll take and bounce a

rock off'n your head."



"Oh, of COURSE you will."



"Well I WILL."



"Well why don't you DO it then? What do you keep SAYING you will for?

Why don't you DO it? It's because you're afraid."



"I AIN'T afraid."



"You are."



"I ain't."



"You are."



Another pause, and more eying and sidling around each other. Presently

they were shoulder to shoulder. Tom said:



"Get away from here!"



"Go away yourself!"



"I won't."



"I won't either."



So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and

both shoving with might and main, and glowering at each other with

hate. But neither could get an advantage. After struggling till both

were hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution,

and Tom said:



"You're a coward and a pup. I'll tell my big brother on you, and he

can thrash you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too."



"What do I care for your big brother? I've got a brother that's bigger

than he is--and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too."

[Both brothers were imaginary.]



"That's a lie."



"YOUR saying so don't make it so."



Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said:



"I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand

up. Anybody that'll take a dare will steal sheep."



The new boy stepped over promptly, and said:



"Now you said you'd do it, now let's see you do it."



"Don't you crowd me now; you better look out."



"Well, you SAID you'd do it--why don't you do it?"



"By jingo! for two cents I WILL do it."



The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out

with derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys

were rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats; and

for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other's hair and

clothes, punched and scratched each other's nose, and covered

themselves with dust and glory. Presently the confusion took form, and

through the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the new boy, and

pounding him with his fists. "Holler 'nuff!" said he.



The boy only struggled to free himself. He was crying--mainly from rage.



"Holler 'nuff!"--and the pounding went on.



At last the stranger got out a smothered "'Nuff!" and Tom let him up

and said:



"Now that'll learn you. Better look out who you're fooling with next

time."



The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing,

snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and

threatening what he would do to Tom the "next time he caught him out."

To which Tom responded with jeers, and started off in high feather, and

as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone, threw

it and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like

an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out where he

lived. He then held a position at the gate for some time, daring the

enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him through the

window and declined. At last the enemy's mother appeared, and called

Tom a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he went

away; but he said he "'lowed" to "lay" for that boy.



He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in

at the window, he uncovered an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt;

and when she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn

his Saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in

its firmness.







CHAPTER II



SATURDAY morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and

fresh, and brimming with life. There was a song in every heart; and if

the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in

every face and a spring in every step. The locust-trees were in bloom

and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff Hill, beyond

the village and above it, was green with vegetation and it lay just far

enough away to seem a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting.



Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash and a

long-handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left him and

a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards of board

fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a

burden. Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost

plank; repeated the operation; did it again; compared the insignificant

whitewashed streak with the far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed

fence, and sat down on a tree-box discouraged. Jim came skipping out at

the gate with a tin pail, and singing Buffalo Gals. Bringing water from

the town pump had always been hateful work in Tom's eyes, before, but

now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there was company at

the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were always there

waiting their turns, resting, trading playthings, quarrelling,

fighting, skylarking. And he remembered that although the pump was only

a hundred and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of

water under an hour--and even then somebody generally had to go after

him. Tom said:



"Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash some."



Jim shook his head and said:



"Can't, Mars Tom. Ole missis, she tole me I got to go an' git dis

water an' not stop foolin' roun' wid anybody. She say she spec' Mars

Tom gwine to ax me to whitewash, an' so she tole me go 'long an' 'tend

to my own business--she 'lowed SHE'D 'tend to de whitewashin'."



"Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim. That's the way she always

talks. Gimme the bucket--I won't be gone only a a minute. SHE won't

ever know."



"Oh, I dasn't, Mars Tom. Ole missis she'd take an' tar de head off'n

me. 'Deed she would."



"SHE! She never licks anybody--whacks 'em over the head with her

thimble--and who cares for that, I'd like to know. She talks awful, but

talk don't hurt--anyways it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give you

a marvel. I'll give you a white alley!"



Jim began to waver.



"White alley, Jim! And it's a bully taw."



"My! Dat's a mighty gay marvel, I tell you! But Mars Tom I's powerful

'fraid ole missis--"



"And besides, if you will I'll show you my sore toe."



Jim was only human--this attraction was too much for him. He put down

his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with absorbing

interest while the bandage was being unwound. In another moment he was

flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was

whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the field

with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye.



But Tom's energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had

planned for this day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys

would come tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and

they would make a world of fun of him for having to work--the very

thought of it burnt him like fire. He got out his worldly wealth and

examined it--bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an

exchange of WORK, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an

hour of pure freedom. So he returned his straitened means to his

pocket, and gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys. At this dark

and hopeless moment an inspiration burst upon him! Nothing less than a

great, magnificent inspiration.



He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in

sight presently--the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been

dreading. Ben's gait was the hop-skip-and-jump--proof enough that his

heart was light and his anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and

giving a long, melodious whoop, at intervals, followed by a deep-toned

ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was personating a steamboat. As

he drew near, he slackened speed, took the middle of the street, leaned

far over to starboard and rounded to ponderously and with laborious

pomp and circumstance--for he was personating the Big Missouri, and

considered himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat and

captain and engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself

standing on his own hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them:



"Stop her, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling!" The headway ran almost out, and he

drew up slowly toward the sidewalk.



"Ship up to back! Ting-a-ling-ling!" His arms straightened and

stiffened down his sides.



"Set her back on the stabboard! Ting-a-ling-ling! Chow! ch-chow-wow!

Chow!" His right hand, meantime, describing stately circles--for it was

representing a forty-foot wheel.



"Let her go back on the labboard! Ting-a-lingling! Chow-ch-chow-chow!"

The left hand began to describe circles.



"Stop the stabboard! Ting-a-ling-ling! Stop the labboard! Come ahead

on the stabboard! Stop her! Let your outside turn over slow!

Ting-a-ling-ling! Chow-ow-ow! Get out that head-line! LIVELY now!

Come--out with your spring-line--what're you about there! Take a turn

round that stump with the bight of it! Stand by that stage, now--let her

go! Done with the engines, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling! SH'T! S'H'T! SH'T!"

(trying the gauge-cocks).



Tom went on whitewashing--paid no attention to the steamboat. Ben

stared a moment and then said: "Hi-YI! YOU'RE up a stump, ain't you!"



No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then

he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result, as

before. Ben ranged up alongside of him. Tom's mouth watered for the

apple, but he stuck to his work. Ben said:



"Hello, old chap, you got to work, hey?"



Tom wheeled suddenly and said:



"Why, it's you, Ben! I warn't noticing."



"Say--I'm going in a-swimming, I am. Don't you wish you could? But of

course you'd druther WORK--wouldn't you? Course you would!"



Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said:



"What do you call work?"



"Why, ain't THAT work?"



Tom resumed his whitewashing, and answered carelessly:



"Well, maybe it is, and maybe it ain't. All I know, is, it suits Tom

Sawyer."



"Oh come, now, you don't mean to let on that you LIKE it?"



The brush continued to move.



"Like it? Well, I don't see why I oughtn't to like it. Does a boy get

a chance to whitewash a fence every day?"



That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped nibbling his apple. Tom

swept his brush daintily back and forth--stepped back to note the

effect--added a touch here and there--criticised the effect again--Ben

watching every move and getting more and more interested, more and more

absorbed. Presently he said:



"Say, Tom, let ME whitewash a little."



Tom considered, was about to consent; but he altered his mind:



"No--no--I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see, Aunt Polly's

awful particular about this fence--right here on the street, you know

--but if it was the back fence I wouldn't mind and SHE wouldn't. Yes,

she's awful particular about this fence; it's got to be done very

careful; I reckon there ain't one boy in a thousand, maybe two

thousand, that can do it the way it's got to be done."



"No--is that so? Oh come, now--lemme just try. Only just a little--I'd

let YOU, if you was me, Tom."



"Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly--well, Jim wanted to

do it, but she wouldn't let him; Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't

let Sid. Now don't you see how I'm fixed? If you was to tackle this

fence and anything was to happen to it--"



"Oh, shucks, I'll be just as careful. Now lemme try. Say--I'll give

you the core of my apple."



"Well, here--No, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard--"



"I'll give you ALL of it!"



Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face, but alacrity in his

heart. And while the late steamer Big Missouri worked and sweated in

the sun, the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by,

dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the slaughter of more

innocents. There was no lack of material; boys happened along every

little while; they came to jeer, but remained to whitewash. By the time

Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for

a kite, in good repair; and when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in

for a dead rat and a string to swing it with--and so on, and so on,

hour after hour. And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being

a poor poverty-stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling

in wealth. He had besides the things before mentioned, twelve marbles,

part of a jews-harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass to look through, a

spool cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, a fragment of chalk,

a glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, six

fire-crackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass doorknob, a

dog-collar--but no dog--the handle of a knife, four pieces of

orange-peel, and a dilapidated old window sash.



He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while--plenty of company

--and the fence had three coats of whitewash on it! If he hadn't run out

of whitewash he would have bankrupted every boy in the village.



Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world, after all. He

had discovered a great law of human action, without knowing it--namely,

that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only

necessary to make the thing difficult to attain. If he had been a great

and wise philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have

comprehended that Work consists of whatever a body is OBLIGED to do,

and that Play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do. And

this would help him to understand why constructing artificial flowers

or performing on a tread-mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or

climbing Mont Blanc is only amusement. There are wealthy gentlemen in

England who drive four-horse passenger-coaches twenty or thirty miles

on a daily line, in the summer, because the privilege costs them

considerable money; but if they were offered wages for the service,

that would turn it into work and then they would resign.



The boy mused awhile over the substantial change which had taken place

in his worldly circumstances, and then wended toward headquarters to

report.







CHAPTER III



TOM presented himself before Aunt Polly, who was sitting by an open

window in a pleasant rearward apartment, which was bedroom,

breakfast-room, dining-room, and library, combined. The balmy summer

air, the restful quiet, the odor of the flowers, and the drowsing murmur

of the bees had had their effect, and she was nodding over her knitting

--for she had no company but the cat, and it was asleep in her lap. Her

spectacles were propped up on her gray head for safety. She had thought

that of course Tom had deserted long ago, and she wondered at seeing him

place himself in her power again in this intrepid way. He said: "Mayn't

I go and play now, aunt?"



"What, a'ready? How much have you done?"



"It's all done, aunt."



"Tom, don't lie to me--I can't bear it."



"I ain't, aunt; it IS all done."



Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence. She went out to see

for herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent.

of Tom's statement true. When she found the entire fence whitewashed,

and not only whitewashed but elaborately coated and recoated, and even

a streak added to the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable.

She said:



"Well, I never! There's no getting round it, you can work when you're

a mind to, Tom." And then she diluted the compliment by adding, "But

it's powerful seldom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say. Well, go 'long

and play; but mind you get back some time in a week, or I'll tan you."



She was so overcome by the splendor of his achievement that she took

him into the closet and selected a choice apple and delivered it to

him, along with an improving lecture upon the added value and flavor a

treat took to itself when it came without sin through virtuous effort.

And while she closed with a happy Scriptural flourish, he "hooked" a

doughnut.



Then he skipped out, and saw Sid just starting up the outside stairway

that led to the back rooms on the second floor. Clods were handy and

the air was full of them in a twinkling. They raged around Sid like a

hail-storm; and before Aunt Polly could collect her surprised faculties

and sally to the rescue, six or seven clods had taken personal effect,

and Tom was over the fence and gone. There was a gate, but as a general

thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it. His soul was at

peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to his

black thread and getting him into trouble.



Tom skirted the block, and came round into a muddy alley that led by

the back of his aunt's cow-stable. He presently got safely beyond the

reach of capture and punishment, and hastened toward the public square

of the village, where two "military" companies of boys had met for

conflict, according to previous appointment. Tom was General of one of

these armies, Joe Harper (a bosom friend) General of the other. These

two great commanders did not condescend to fight in person--that being

better suited to the still smaller fry--but sat together on an eminence

and conducted the field operations by orders delivered through

aides-de-camp. Tom's army won a great victory, after a long and

hard-fought battle. Then the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged,

the terms of the next disagreement agreed upon, and the day for the

necessary battle appointed; after which the armies fell into line and

marched away, and Tom turned homeward alone.



As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new

girl in the garden--a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair

plaited into two long-tails, white summer frock and embroidered

pantalettes. The fresh-crowned hero fell without firing a shot. A

certain Amy Lawrence vanished out of his heart and left not even a

memory of herself behind. He had thought he loved her to distraction;

he had regarded his passion as adoration; and behold it was only a poor

little evanescent partiality. He had been months winning her; she had

confessed hardly a week ago; he had been the happiest and the proudest

boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one instant of time

she had gone out of his heart like a casual stranger whose visit is

done.



He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye, till he saw that she

had discovered him; then he pretended he did not know she was present,

and began to "show off" in all sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order to

win her admiration. He kept up this grotesque foolishness for some

time; but by-and-by, while he was in the midst of some dangerous

gymnastic performances, he glanced aside and saw that the little girl

was wending her way toward the house. Tom came up to the fence and

leaned on it, grieving, and hoping she would tarry yet awhile longer.

She halted a moment on the steps and then moved toward the door. Tom

heaved a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold. But his face

lit up, right away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment

before she disappeared.



The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and

then shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street as if

he had discovered something of interest going on in that direction.

Presently he picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his

nose, with his head tilted far back; and as he moved from side to side,

in his efforts, he edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy; finally

his bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes closed upon it, and he

hopped away with the treasure and disappeared round the corner. But

only for a minute--only while he could button the flower inside his

jacket, next his heart--or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not

much posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, anyway.



He returned, now, and hung about the fence till nightfall, "showing

off," as before; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom

comforted himself a little with the hope that she had been near some

window, meantime, and been aware of his attentions. Finally he strode

home reluctantly, with his poor head full of visions.



All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered

"what had got into the child." He took a good scolding about clodding

Sid, and did not seem to mind it in the least. He tried to steal sugar

under his aunt's very nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it. He said:



"Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it."



"Well, Sid don't torment a body the way you do. You'd be always into

that sugar if I warn't watching you."



Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in his

immunity, reached for the sugar-bowl--a sort of glorying over Tom which

was wellnigh unbearable. But Sid's fingers slipped and the bowl dropped

and broke. Tom was in ecstasies. In such ecstasies that he even

controlled his tongue and was silent. He said to himself that he would

not speak a word, even when his aunt came in, but would sit perfectly

still till she asked who did the mischief; and then he would tell, and

there would be nothing so good in the world as to see that pet model

"catch it." He was so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold

himself when the old lady came back and stood above the wreck

discharging lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles. He said to

himself, "Now it's coming!" And the next instant he was sprawling on

the floor! The potent palm was uplifted to strike again when Tom cried

out:



"Hold on, now, what 'er you belting ME for?--Sid broke it!"



Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity. But

when she got her tongue again, she only said:



"Umf! Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I reckon. You been into some

other audacious mischief when I wasn't around, like enough."



Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned to say something

kind and loving; but she judged that this would be construed into a

confession that she had been in the wrong, and discipline forbade that.

So she kept silence, and went about her affairs with a troubled heart.

Tom sulked in a corner and exalted his woes. He knew that in her heart

his aunt was on her knees to him, and he was morosely gratified by the

consciousness of it. He would hang out no signals, he would take notice

of none. He knew that a yearning glance fell upon him, now and then,

through a film of tears, but he refused recognition of it. He pictured

himself lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching

one little forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and

die with that word unsaid. Ah, how would she feel then? And he pictured

himself brought home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and

his sore heart at rest. How she would throw herself upon him, and how

her tears would fall like rain, and her lips pray God to give her back

her boy and she would never, never abuse him any more! But he would lie

there cold and white and make no sign--a poor little sufferer, whose

griefs were at an end. He so worked upon his feelings with the pathos

of these dreams, that he had to keep swallowing, he was so like to

choke; and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which overflowed when he

winked, and ran down and trickled from the end of his nose. And such a

luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows, that he could not bear

to have any worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon it;

it was too sacred for such contact; and so, presently, when his cousin

Mary danced in, all alive with the joy of seeing home again after an

age-long visit of one week to the country, he got up and moved in

clouds and darkness out at one door as she brought song and sunshine in

at the other.



He wandered far from the accustomed haunts of boys, and sought

desolate places that were in harmony with his spirit. A log raft in the

river invited him, and he seated himself on its outer edge and

contemplated the dreary vastness of the stream, wishing, the while,

that he could only be drowned, all at once and unconsciously, without

undergoing the uncomfortable routine devised by nature. Then he thought

of his flower. He got it out, rumpled and wilted, and it mightily

increased his dismal felicity. He wondered if she would pity him if she

knew? Would she cry, and wish that she had a right to put her arms

around his neck and comfort him? Or would she turn coldly away like all

the hollow world? This picture brought such an agony of pleasurable

suffering that he worked it over and over again in his mind and set it

up in new and varied lights, till he wore it threadbare. At last he

rose up sighing and departed in the darkness.



About half-past nine or ten o'clock he came along the deserted street

to where the Adored Unknown lived; he paused a moment; no sound fell

upon his listening ear; a candle was casting a dull glow upon the

curtain of a second-story window. Was the sacred presence there? He

climbed the fence, threaded his stealthy way through the plants, till

he stood under that window; he looked up at it long, and with emotion;

then he laid him down on the ground under it, disposing himself upon

his back, with his hands clasped upon his breast and holding his poor

wilted flower. And thus he would die--out in the cold world, with no

shelter over his homeless head, no friendly hand to wipe the

death-damps from his brow, no loving face to bend pityingly over him

when the great agony came. And thus SHE would see him when she looked

out upon the glad morning, and oh! would she drop one little tear upon

his poor, lifeless form, would she heave one little sigh to see a bright

young life so rudely blighted, so untimely cut down?



The window went up, a maid-servant's discordant voice profaned the

holy calm, and a deluge of water drenched the prone martyr's remains!



The strangling hero sprang up with a relieving snort. There was a whiz

as of a missile in the air, mingled with the murmur of a curse, a sound

as of shivering glass followed, and a small, vague form went over the

fence and shot away in the gloom.



Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying his

drenched garments by the light of a tallow dip, Sid woke up; but if he

had any dim idea of making any "references to allusions," he thought

better of it and held his peace, for there was danger in Tom's eye.



Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made

mental note of the omission.







CHAPTER IV



THE sun rose upon a tranquil world, and beamed down upon the peaceful

village like a benediction. Breakfast over, Aunt Polly had family

worship: it began with a prayer built from the ground up of solid

courses of Scriptural quotations, welded together with a thin mortar of

originality; and from the summit of this she delivered a grim chapter

of the Mosaic Law, as from Sinai.



Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and went to work to "get

his verses." Sid had learned his lesson days before. Tom bent all his

energies to the memorizing of five verses, and he chose part of the

Sermon on the Mount, because he could find no verses that were shorter.

At the end of half an hour Tom had a vague general idea of his lesson,

but no more, for his mind was traversing the whole field of human

thought, and his hands were busy with distracting recreations. Mary

took his book to hear him recite, and he tried to find his way through

the fog:



"Blessed are the--a--a--"



"Poor"--



"Yes--poor; blessed are the poor--a--a--"



"In spirit--"



"In spirit; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they--they--"



"THEIRS--"



"For THEIRS. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom

of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn, for they--they--"



"Sh--"



"For they--a--"



"S, H, A--"



"For they S, H--Oh, I don't know what it is!"



"SHALL!"



"Oh, SHALL! for they shall--for they shall--a--a--shall mourn--a--a--

blessed are they that shall--they that--a--they that shall mourn, for

they shall--a--shall WHAT? Why don't you tell me, Mary?--what do you

want to be so mean for?"



"Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I'm not teasing you. I wouldn't

do that. You must go and learn it again. Don't you be discouraged, Tom,

you'll manage it--and if you do, I'll give you something ever so nice.

There, now, that's a good boy."



"All right! What is it, Mary, tell me what it is."



"Never you mind, Tom. You know if I say it's nice, it is nice."



"You bet you that's so, Mary. All right, I'll tackle it again."



And he did "tackle it again"--and under the double pressure of

curiosity and prospective gain he did it with such spirit that he

accomplished a shining success. Mary gave him a brand-new "Barlow"

knife worth twelve and a half cents; and the convulsion of delight that

swept his system shook him to his foundations. True, the knife would

not cut anything, but it was a "sure-enough" Barlow, and there was

inconceivable grandeur in that--though where the Western boys ever got

the idea that such a weapon could possibly be counterfeited to its

injury is an imposing mystery and will always remain so, perhaps. Tom

contrived to scarify the cupboard with it, and was arranging to begin

on the bureau, when he was called off to dress for Sunday-school.



Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap, and he went

outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there; then he

dipped the soap in the water and laid it down; turned up his sleeves;

poured out the water on the ground, gently, and then entered the

kitchen and began to wipe his face diligently on the towel behind the

door. But Mary removed the towel and said:



"Now ain't you ashamed, Tom. You mustn't be so bad. Water won't hurt

you."



Tom was a trifle disconcerted. The basin was refilled, and this time

he stood over it a little while, gathering resolution; took in a big

breath and began. When he entered the kitchen presently, with both eyes

shut and groping for the towel with his hands, an honorable testimony

of suds and water was dripping from his face. But when he emerged from

the towel, he was not yet satisfactory, for the clean territory stopped

short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; below and beyond this line

there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread downward in

front and backward around his neck. Mary took him in hand, and when she

was done with him he was a man and a brother, without distinction of

color, and his saturated hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls

wrought into a dainty and symmetrical general effect. [He privately

smoothed out the curls, with labor and difficulty, and plastered his

hair close down to his head; for he held curls to be effeminate, and

his own filled his life with bitterness.] Then Mary got out a suit of

his clothing that had been used only on Sundays during two years--they

were simply called his "other clothes"--and so by that we know the

size of his wardrobe. The girl "put him to rights" after he had dressed

himself; she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin, turned his

vast shirt collar down over his shoulders, brushed him off and crowned

him with his speckled straw hat. He now looked exceedingly improved and

uncomfortable. He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked; for there

was a restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that galled him. He

hoped that Mary would forget his shoes, but the hope was blighted; she

coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom, and brought them

out. He lost his temper and said he was always being made to do

everything he didn't want to do. But Mary said, persuasively:



"Please, Tom--that's a good boy."



So he got into the shoes snarling. Mary was soon ready, and the three

children set out for Sunday-school--a place that Tom hated with his

whole heart; but Sid and Mary were fond of it.



Sabbath-school hours were from nine to half-past ten; and then church

service. Two of the children always remained for the sermon

voluntarily, and the other always remained too--for stronger reasons.

The church's high-backed, uncushioned pews would seat about three

hundred persons; the edifice was but a small, plain affair, with a sort

of pine board tree-box on top of it for a steeple. At the door Tom

dropped back a step and accosted a Sunday-dressed comrade:



"Say, Billy, got a yaller ticket?"



"Yes."



"What'll you take for her?"



"What'll you give?"



"Piece of lickrish and a fish-hook."



"Less see 'em."



Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the property changed hands.

Then Tom traded a couple of white alleys for three red tickets, and

some small trifle or other for a couple of blue ones. He waylaid other

boys as they came, and went on buying tickets of various colors ten or

fifteen minutes longer. He entered the church, now, with a swarm of

clean and noisy boys and girls, proceeded to his seat and started a

quarrel with the first boy that came handy. The teacher, a grave,

elderly man, interfered; then turned his back a moment and Tom pulled a

boy's hair in the next bench, and was absorbed in his book when the boy

turned around; stuck a pin in another boy, presently, in order to hear

him say "Ouch!" and got a new reprimand from his teacher. Tom's whole

class were of a pattern--restless, noisy, and troublesome. When they

came to recite their lessons, not one of them knew his verses

perfectly, but had to be prompted all along. However, they worried

through, and each got his reward--in small blue tickets, each with a

passage of Scripture on it; each blue ticket was pay for two verses of

the recitation. Ten blue tickets equalled a red one, and could be

exchanged for it; ten red tickets equalled a yellow one; for ten yellow

tickets the superintendent gave a very plainly bound Bible (worth forty

cents in those easy times) to the pupil. How many of my readers would

have the industry and application to memorize two thousand verses, even

for a Dore Bible? And yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in this way--it

was the patient work of two years--and a boy of German parentage had

won four or five. He once recited three thousand verses without

stopping; but the strain upon his mental faculties was too great, and

he was little better than an idiot from that day forth--a grievous

misfortune for the school, for on great occasions, before company, the

superintendent (as Tom expressed it) had always made this boy come out

and "spread himself." Only the older pupils managed to keep their

tickets and stick to their tedious work long enough to get a Bible, and

so the delivery of one of these prizes was a rare and noteworthy

circumstance; the successful pupil was so great and conspicuous for

that day that on the spot every scholar's heart was fired with a fresh

ambition that often lasted a couple of weeks. It is possible that Tom's

mental stomach had never really hungered for one of those prizes, but

unquestionably his entire being had for many a day longed for the glory

and the eclat that came with it.



In due course the superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit, with

a closed hymn-book in his hand and his forefinger inserted between its

leaves, and commanded attention. When a Sunday-school superintendent

makes his customary little speech, a hymn-book in the hand is as

necessary as is the inevitable sheet of music in the hand of a singer

who stands forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert

--though why, is a mystery: for neither the hymn-book nor the sheet of

music is ever referred to by the sufferer. This superintendent was a

slim creature of thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair;

he wore a stiff standing-collar whose upper edge almost reached his

ears and whose sharp points curved forward abreast the corners of his

mouth--a fence that compelled a straight lookout ahead, and a turning

of the whole body when a side view was required; his chin was propped

on a spreading cravat which was as broad and as long as a bank-note,

and had fringed ends; his boot toes were turned sharply up, in the

fashion of the day, like sleigh-runners--an effect patiently and

laboriously produced by the young men by sitting with their toes

pressed against a wall for hours together. Mr. Walters was very earnest

of mien, and very sincere and honest at heart; and he held sacred

things and places in such reverence, and so separated them from worldly

matters, that unconsciously to himself his Sunday-school voice had

acquired a peculiar intonation which was wholly absent on week-days. He

began after this fashion:



"Now, children, I want you all to sit up just as straight and pretty

as you can and give me all your attention for a minute or two. There

--that is it. That is the way good little boys and girls should do. I see

one little girl who is looking out of the window--I am afraid she

thinks I am out there somewhere--perhaps up in one of the trees making

a speech to the little birds. [Applausive titter.] I want to tell you

how good it makes me feel to see so many bright, clean little faces

assembled in a place like this, learning to do right and be good." And

so forth and so on. It is not necessary to set down the rest of the

oration. It was of a pattern which does not vary, and so it is familiar

to us all.



The latter third of the speech was marred by the resumption of fights

and other recreations among certain of the bad boys, and by fidgetings

and whisperings that extended far and wide, washing even to the bases

of isolated and incorruptible rocks like Sid and Mary. But now every

sound ceased suddenly, with the subsidence of Mr. Walters' voice, and

the conclusion of the speech was received with a burst of silent

gratitude.



A good part of the whispering had been occasioned by an event which

was more or less rare--the entrance of visitors: lawyer Thatcher,

accompanied by a very feeble and aged man; a fine, portly, middle-aged

gentleman with iron-gray hair; and a dignified lady who was doubtless

the latter's wife. The lady was leading a child. Tom had been restless

and full of chafings and repinings; conscience-smitten, too--he could

not meet Amy Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her loving gaze. But

when he saw this small new-comer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in

a moment. The next moment he was "showing off" with all his might

--cuffing boys, pulling hair, making faces--in a word, using every art

that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and win her applause. His

exaltation had but one alloy--the memory of his humiliation in this

angel's garden--and that record in sand was fast washing out, under

the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it now.



The visitors were given the highest seat of honor, and as soon as Mr.

Walters' speech was finished, he introduced them to the school. The

middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage--no less a one

than the county judge--altogether the most august creation these

children had ever looked upon--and they wondered what kind of material

he was made of--and they half wanted to hear him roar, and were half

afraid he might, too. He was from Constantinople, twelve miles away--so

he had travelled, and seen the world--these very eyes had looked upon

the county court-house--which was said to have a tin roof. The awe

which these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive silence

and the ranks of staring eyes. This was the great Judge Thatcher,

brother of their own lawyer. Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward, to

be familiar with the great man and be envied by the school. It would

have been music to his soul to hear the whisperings:



"Look at him, Jim! He's a going up there. Say--look! he's a going to

shake hands with him--he IS shaking hands with him! By jings, don't you

wish you was Jeff?"



Mr. Walters fell to "showing off," with all sorts of official

bustlings and activities, giving orders, delivering judgments,

discharging directions here, there, everywhere that he could find a

target. The librarian "showed off"--running hither and thither with his

arms full of books and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that

insect authority delights in. The young lady teachers "showed off"

--bending sweetly over pupils that were lately being boxed, lifting

pretty warning fingers at bad little boys and patting good ones

lovingly. The young gentlemen teachers "showed off" with small

scoldings and other little displays of authority and fine attention to

discipline--and most of the teachers, of both sexes, found business up

at the library, by the pulpit; and it was business that frequently had

to be done over again two or three times (with much seeming vexation).

The little girls "showed off" in various ways, and the little boys

"showed off" with such diligence that the air was thick with paper wads

and the murmur of scufflings. And above it all the great man sat and

beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all the house, and warmed himself

in the sun of his own grandeur--for he was "showing off," too.



There was only one thing wanting to make Mr. Walters' ecstasy

complete, and that was a chance to deliver a Bible-prize and exhibit a

prodigy. Several pupils had a few yellow tickets, but none had enough

--he had been around among the star pupils inquiring. He would have given

worlds, now, to have that German lad back again with a sound mind.



And now at this moment, when hope was dead, Tom Sawyer came forward

with nine yellow tickets, nine red tickets, and ten blue ones, and

demanded a Bible. This was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. Walters

was not expecting an application from this source for the next ten

years. But there was no getting around it--here were the certified

checks, and they were good for their face. Tom was therefore elevated

to a place with the Judge and the other elect, and the great news was

announced from headquarters. It was the most stunning surprise of the

decade, and so profound was the sensation that it lifted the new hero

up to the judicial one's altitude, and the school had two marvels to

gaze upon in place of one. The boys were all eaten up with envy--but

those that suffered the bitterest pangs were those who perceived too

late that they themselves had contributed to this hated splendor by

trading tickets to Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling

whitewashing privileges. These despised themselves, as being the dupes

of a wily fraud, a guileful snake in the grass.



The prize was delivered to Tom with as much effusion as the

superintendent could pump up under the circumstances; but it lacked

somewhat of the true gush, for the poor fellow's instinct taught him

that there was a mystery here that could not well bear the light,

perhaps; it was simply preposterous that this boy had warehoused two

thousand sheaves of Scriptural wisdom on his premises--a dozen would

strain his capacity, without a doubt.



Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in

her face--but he wouldn't look. She wondered; then she was just a grain

troubled; next a dim suspicion came and went--came again; she watched;

a furtive glance told her worlds--and then her heart broke, and she was

jealous, and angry, and the tears came and she hated everybody. Tom

most of all (she thought).



Tom was introduced to the Judge; but his tongue was tied, his breath

would hardly come, his heart quaked--partly because of the awful

greatness of the man, but mainly because he was her parent. He would

have liked to fall down and worship him, if it were in the dark. The

Judge put his hand on Tom's head and called him a fine little man, and

asked him what his name was. The boy stammered, gasped, and got it out:



"Tom."



"Oh, no, not Tom--it is--"



"Thomas."



"Ah, that's it. I thought there was more to it, maybe. That's very

well. But you've another one I daresay, and you'll tell it to me, won't

you?"



"Tell the gentleman your other name, Thomas," said Walters, "and say

sir. You mustn't forget your manners."



"Thomas Sawyer--sir."



"That's it! That's a good boy. Fine boy. Fine, manly little fellow.

Two thousand verses is a great many--very, very great many. And you

never can be sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for

knowledge is worth more than anything there is in the world; it's what

makes great men and good men; you'll be a great man and a good man

yourself, some day, Thomas, and then you'll look back and say, It's all

owing to the precious Sunday-school privileges of my boyhood--it's all

owing to my dear teachers that taught me to learn--it's all owing to

the good superintendent, who encouraged me, and watched over me, and

gave me a beautiful Bible--a splendid elegant Bible--to keep and have

it all for my own, always--it's all owing to right bringing up! That is

what you will say, Thomas--and you wouldn't take any money for those

two thousand verses--no indeed you wouldn't. And now you wouldn't mind

telling me and this lady some of the things you've learned--no, I know

you wouldn't--for we are proud of little boys that learn. Now, no

doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples. Won't you tell us

the names of the first two that were appointed?"



Tom was tugging at a button-hole and looking sheepish. He blushed,

now, and his eyes fell. Mr. Walters' heart sank within him. He said to

himself, it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest

question--why DID the Judge ask him? Yet he felt obliged to speak up

and say:



"Answer the gentleman, Thomas--don't be afraid."



Tom still hung fire.



"Now I know you'll tell me," said the lady. "The names of the first

two disciples were--"



"DAVID AND GOLIAH!"



Let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the scene.







CHAPTER V



ABOUT half-past ten the cracked bell of the small church began to

ring, and presently the people began to gather for the morning sermon.

The Sunday-school children distributed themselves about the house and

occupied pews with their parents, so as to be under supervision. Aunt

Polly came, and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her--Tom being placed

next the aisle, in order that he might be as far away from the open

window and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible. The crowd

filed up the aisles: the aged and needy postmaster, who had seen better

days; the mayor and his wife--for they had a mayor there, among other

unnecessaries; the justice of the peace; the widow Douglass, fair,

smart, and forty, a generous, good-hearted soul and well-to-do, her

hill mansion the only palace in the town, and the most hospitable and

much the most lavish in the matter of festivities that St. Petersburg

could boast; the bent and venerable Major and Mrs. Ward; lawyer

Riverson, the new notable from a distance; next the belle of the

village, followed by a troop of lawn-clad and ribbon-decked young

heart-breakers; then all the young clerks in town in a body--for they

had stood in the vestibule sucking their cane-heads, a circling wall of

oiled and simpering admirers, till the last girl had run their gantlet;

and last of all came the Model Boy, Willie Mufferson, taking as heedful

care of his mother as if she were cut glass. He always brought his

mother to church, and was the pride of all the matrons. The boys all

hated him, he was so good. And besides, he had been "thrown up to them"

so much. His white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket behind, as

usual on Sundays--accidentally. Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked

upon boys who had as snobs.



The congregation being fully assembled, now, the bell rang once more,

to warn laggards and stragglers, and then a solemn hush fell upon the

church which was only broken by the tittering and whispering of the

choir in the gallery. The choir always tittered and whispered all

through service. There was once a church choir that was not ill-bred,

but I have forgotten where it was, now. It was a great many years ago,

and I can scarcely remember anything about it, but I think it was in

some foreign country.



The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with a relish, in

a peculiar style which was much admired in that part of the country.

His voice began on a medium key and climbed steadily up till it reached

a certain point, where it bore with strong emphasis upon the topmost

word and then plunged down as if from a spring-board:



  Shall I be car-ri-ed toe the skies, on flow'ry BEDS of ease,



  Whilst others fight to win the prize, and sail thro' BLOODY seas?



He was regarded as a wonderful reader. At church "sociables" he was

always called upon to read poetry; and when he was through, the ladies

would lift up their hands and let them fall helplessly in their laps,

and "wall" their eyes, and shake their heads, as much as to say, "Words

cannot express it; it is too beautiful, TOO beautiful for this mortal

earth."



After the hymn had been sung, the Rev. Mr. Sprague turned himself into

a bulletin-board, and read off "notices" of meetings and societies and

things till it seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of

doom--a queer custom which is still kept up in America, even in cities,

away here in this age of abundant newspapers. Often, the less there is

to justify a traditional custom, the harder it is to get rid of it.



And now the minister prayed. A good, generous prayer it was, and went

into details: it pleaded for the church, and the little children of the

church; for the other churches of the village; for the village itself;

for the county; for the State; for the State officers; for the United

States; for the churches of the United States; for Congress; for the

President; for the officers of the Government; for poor sailors, tossed

by stormy seas; for the oppressed millions groaning under the heel of

European monarchies and Oriental despotisms; for such as have the light

and the good tidings, and yet have not eyes to see nor ears to hear

withal; for the heathen in the far islands of the sea; and closed with

a supplication that the words he was about to speak might find grace

and favor, and be as seed sown in fertile ground, yielding in time a

grateful harvest of good. Amen.



There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing congregation sat

down. The boy whose history this book relates did not enjoy the prayer,

he only endured it--if he even did that much. He was restive all

through it; he kept tally of the details of the prayer, unconsciously

--for he was not listening, but he knew the ground of old, and the

clergyman's regular route over it--and when a little trifle of new

matter was interlarded, his ear detected it and his whole nature

resented it; he considered additions unfair, and scoundrelly. In the

midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the back of the pew in front of

him and tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together,

embracing its head with its arms, and polishing it so vigorously that

it seemed to almost part company with the body, and the slender thread

of a neck was exposed to view; scraping its wings with its hind legs

and smoothing them to its body as if they had been coat-tails; going

through its whole toilet as tranquilly as if it knew it was perfectly

safe. As indeed it was; for as sorely as Tom's hands itched to grab for

it they did not dare--he believed his soul would be instantly destroyed

if he did such a thing while the prayer was going on. But with the

closing sentence his hand began to curve and steal forward; and the

instant the "Amen" was out the fly was a prisoner of war. His aunt

detected the act and made him let it go.



The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through

an argument that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod

--and yet it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone

and thinned the predestined elect down to a company so small as to be

hardly worth the saving. Tom counted the pages of the sermon; after

church he always knew how many pages there had been, but he seldom knew

anything else about the discourse. However, this time he was really

interested for a little while. The minister made a grand and moving

picture of the assembling together of the world's hosts at the

millennium when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a

little child should lead them. But the pathos, the lesson, the moral of

the great spectacle were lost upon the boy; he only thought of the

conspicuousness of the principal character before the on-looking

nations; his face lit with the thought, and he said to himself that he

wished he could be that child, if it was a tame lion.



Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argument was resumed.

Presently he bethought him of a treasure he had and got it out. It was

a large black beetle with formidable jaws--a "pinchbug," he called it.

It was in a percussion-cap box. The first thing the beetle did was to

take him by the finger. A natural fillip followed, the beetle went

floundering into the aisle and lit on its back, and the hurt finger

went into the boy's mouth. The beetle lay there working its helpless

legs, unable to turn over. Tom eyed it, and longed for it; but it was

safe out of his reach. Other people uninterested in the sermon found

relief in the beetle, and they eyed it too. Presently a vagrant poodle

dog came idling along, sad at heart, lazy with the summer softness and

the quiet, weary of captivity, sighing for change. He spied the beetle;

the drooping tail lifted and wagged. He surveyed the prize; walked

around it; smelt at it from a safe distance; walked around it again;

grew bolder, and took a closer smell; then lifted his lip and made a

gingerly snatch at it, just missing it; made another, and another;

began to enjoy the diversion; subsided to his stomach with the beetle

between his paws, and continued his experiments; grew weary at last,

and then indifferent and absent-minded. His head nodded, and little by

little his chin descended and touched the enemy, who seized it. There

was a sharp yelp, a flirt of the poodle's head, and the beetle fell a

couple of yards away, and lit on its back once more. The neighboring

spectators shook with a gentle inward joy, several faces went behind

fans and handkerchiefs, and Tom was entirely happy. The dog looked

foolish, and probably felt so; but there was resentment in his heart,

too, and a craving for revenge. So he went to the beetle and began a

wary attack on it again; jumping at it from every point of a circle,

lighting with his fore-paws within an inch of the creature, making even

closer snatches at it with his teeth, and jerking his head till his

ears flapped again. But he grew tired once more, after a while; tried

to amuse himself with a fly but found no relief; followed an ant

around, with his nose close to the floor, and quickly wearied of that;

yawned, sighed, forgot the beetle entirely, and sat down on it. Then

there was a wild yelp of agony and the poodle went sailing up the

aisle; the yelps continued, and so did the dog; he crossed the house in

front of the altar; he flew down the other aisle; he crossed before the

doors; he clamored up the home-stretch; his anguish grew with his

progress, till presently he was but a woolly comet moving in its orbit

with the gleam and the speed of light. At last the frantic sufferer

sheered from its course, and sprang into its master's lap; he flung it

out of the window, and the voice of distress quickly thinned away and

died in the distance.



By this time the whole church was red-faced and suffocating with

suppressed laughter, and the sermon had come to a dead standstill. The

discourse was resumed presently, but it went lame and halting, all

possibility of impressiveness being at an end; for even the gravest

sentiments were constantly being received with a smothered burst of

unholy mirth, under cover of some remote pew-back, as if the poor

parson had said a rarely facetious thing. It was a genuine relief to

the whole congregation when the ordeal was over and the benediction

pronounced.



Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful, thinking to himself that there

was some satisfaction about divine service when there was a bit of

variety in it. He had but one marring thought; he was willing that the

dog should play with his pinchbug, but he did not think it was upright

in him to carry it off.







CHAPTER VI



MONDAY morning found Tom Sawyer miserable. Monday morning always found

him so--because it began another week's slow suffering in school. He

generally began that day with wishing he had had no intervening

holiday, it made the going into captivity and fetters again so much

more odious.



Tom lay thinking. Presently it occurred to him that he wished he was

sick; then he could stay home from school. Here was a vague

possibility. He canvassed his system. No ailment was found, and he

investigated again. This time he thought he could detect colicky

symptoms, and he began to encourage them with considerable hope. But

they soon grew feeble, and presently died wholly away. He reflected

further. Suddenly he discovered something. One of his upper front teeth

was loose. This was lucky; he was about to begin to groan, as a

"starter," as he called it, when it occurred to him that if he came

into court with that argument, his aunt would pull it out, and that

would hurt. So he thought he would hold the tooth in reserve for the

present, and seek further. Nothing offered for some little time, and

then he remembered hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that

laid up a patient for two or three weeks and threatened to make him

lose a finger. So the boy eagerly drew his sore toe from under the

sheet and held it up for inspection. But now he did not know the

necessary symptoms. However, it seemed well worth while to chance it,

so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit.



But Sid slept on unconscious.



Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe.



No result from Sid.



Tom was panting with his exertions by this time. He took a rest and

then swelled himself up and fetched a succession of admirable groans.



Sid snored on.



Tom was aggravated. He said, "Sid, Sid!" and shook him. This course

worked well, and Tom began to groan again. Sid yawned, stretched, then

brought himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare at

Tom. Tom went on groaning. Sid said:



"Tom! Say, Tom!" [No response.] "Here, Tom! TOM! What is the matter,

Tom?" And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.



Tom moaned out:



"Oh, don't, Sid. Don't joggle me."



"Why, what's the matter, Tom? I must call auntie."



"No--never mind. It'll be over by and by, maybe. Don't call anybody."



"But I must! DON'T groan so, Tom, it's awful. How long you been this

way?"



"Hours. Ouch! Oh, don't stir so, Sid, you'll kill me."



"Tom, why didn't you wake me sooner? Oh, Tom, DON'T! It makes my

flesh crawl to hear you. Tom, what is the matter?"



"I forgive you everything, Sid. [Groan.] Everything you've ever done

to me. When I'm gone--"



"Oh, Tom, you ain't dying, are you? Don't, Tom--oh, don't. Maybe--"



"I forgive everybody, Sid. [Groan.] Tell 'em so, Sid. And Sid, you

give my window-sash and my cat with one eye to that new girl that's

come to town, and tell her--"



But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom was suffering in

reality, now, so handsomely was his imagination working, and so his

groans had gathered quite a genuine tone.



Sid flew down-stairs and said:



"Oh, Aunt Polly, come! Tom's dying!"



"Dying!"



"Yes'm. Don't wait--come quick!"



"Rubbage! I don't believe it!"



But she fled up-stairs, nevertheless, with Sid and Mary at her heels.

And her face grew white, too, and her lip trembled. When she reached

the bedside she gasped out:



"You, Tom! Tom, what's the matter with you?"



"Oh, auntie, I'm--"



"What's the matter with you--what is the matter with you, child?"



"Oh, auntie, my sore toe's mortified!"



The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed a little, then cried a

little, then did both together. This restored her and she said:



"Tom, what a turn you did give me. Now you shut up that nonsense and

climb out of this."



The groans ceased and the pain vanished from the toe. The boy felt a

little foolish, and he said:



"Aunt Polly, it SEEMED mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my

tooth at all."



"Your tooth, indeed! What's the matter with your tooth?"



"One of them's loose, and it aches perfectly awful."



"There, there, now, don't begin that groaning again. Open your mouth.

Well--your tooth IS loose, but you're not going to die about that.

Mary, get me a silk thread, and a chunk of fire out of the kitchen."



Tom said:



"Oh, please, auntie, don't pull it out. It don't hurt any more. I wish

I may never stir if it does. Please don't, auntie. I don't want to stay

home from school."



"Oh, you don't, don't you? So all this row was because you thought

you'd get to stay home from school and go a-fishing? Tom, Tom, I love

you so, and you seem to try every way you can to break my old heart

with your outrageousness." By this time the dental instruments were

ready. The old lady made one end of the silk thread fast to Tom's tooth

with a loop and tied the other to the bedpost. Then she seized the

chunk of fire and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy's face. The

tooth hung dangling by the bedpost, now.



But all trials bring their compensations. As Tom wended to school

after breakfast, he was the envy of every boy he met because the gap in

his upper row of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and

admirable way. He gathered quite a following of lads interested in the

exhibition; and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of

fascination and homage up to this time, now found himself suddenly

without an adherent, and shorn of his glory. His heart was heavy, and

he said with a disdain which he did not feel that it wasn't anything to

spit like Tom Sawyer; but another boy said, "Sour grapes!" and he

wandered away a dismantled hero.



Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village, Huckleberry

Finn, son of the town drunkard. Huckleberry was cordially hated and

dreaded by all the mothers of the town, because he was idle and lawless

and vulgar and bad--and because all their children admired him so, and

delighted in his forbidden society, and wished they dared to be like

him. Tom was like the rest of the respectable boys, in that he envied

Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and was under strict orders

not to play with him. So he played with him every time he got a chance.

Huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown

men, and they were in perennial bloom and fluttering with rags. His hat

was a vast ruin with a wide crescent lopped out of its brim; his coat,

when he wore one, hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons

far down the back; but one suspender supported his trousers; the seat

of the trousers bagged low and contained nothing, the fringed legs

dragged in the dirt when not rolled up.



Huckleberry came and went, at his own free will. He slept on doorsteps

in fine weather and in empty hogsheads in wet; he did not have to go to

school or to church, or call any being master or obey anybody; he could

go fishing or swimming when and where he chose, and stay as long as it

suited him; nobody forbade him to fight; he could sit up as late as he

pleased; he was always the first boy that went barefoot in the spring

and the last to resume leather in the fall; he never had to wash, nor

put on clean clothes; he could swear wonderfully. In a word, everything

that goes to make life precious that boy had. So thought every

harassed, hampered, respectable boy in St. Petersburg.



Tom hailed the romantic outcast:



"Hello, Huckleberry!"



"Hello yourself, and see how you like it."



"What's that you got?"



"Dead cat."



"Lemme see him, Huck. My, he's pretty stiff. Where'd you get him ?"



"Bought him off'n a boy."



"What did you give?"



"I give a blue ticket and a bladder that I got at the slaughter-house."



"Where'd you get the blue ticket?"



"Bought it off'n Ben Rogers two weeks ago for a hoop-stick."



"Say--what is dead cats good for, Huck?"



"Good for? Cure warts with."



"No! Is that so? I know something that's better."



"I bet you don't. What is it?"



"Why, spunk-water."



"Spunk-water! I wouldn't give a dern for spunk-water."



"You wouldn't, wouldn't you? D'you ever try it?"



"No, I hain't. But Bob Tanner did."



"Who told you so!"



"Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny

told Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and

the nigger told me. There now!"



"Well, what of it? They'll all lie. Leastways all but the nigger. I

don't know HIM. But I never see a nigger that WOULDN'T lie. Shucks! Now

you tell me how Bob Tanner done it, Huck."



"Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump where the

rain-water was."



"In the daytime?"



"Certainly."



"With his face to the stump?"



"Yes. Least I reckon so."



"Did he say anything?"



"I don't reckon he did. I don't know."



"Aha! Talk about trying to cure warts with spunk-water such a blame

fool way as that! Why, that ain't a-going to do any good. You got to go

all by yourself, to the middle of the woods, where you know there's a

spunk-water stump, and just as it's midnight you back up against the

stump and jam your hand in and say:



  'Barley-corn, barley-corn, injun-meal shorts,

   Spunk-water, spunk-water, swaller these warts,'



and then walk away quick, eleven steps, with your eyes shut, and then

turn around three times and walk home without speaking to anybody.

Because if you speak the charm's busted."



"Well, that sounds like a good way; but that ain't the way Bob Tanner

done."



"No, sir, you can bet he didn't, becuz he's the wartiest boy in this

town; and he wouldn't have a wart on him if he'd knowed how to work

spunk-water. I've took off thousands of warts off of my hands that way,

Huck. I play with frogs so much that I've always got considerable many

warts. Sometimes I take 'em off with a bean."



"Yes, bean's good. I've done that."



"Have you? What's your way?"



"You take and split the bean, and cut the wart so as to get some

blood, and then you put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and

dig a hole and bury it 'bout midnight at the crossroads in the dark of

the moon, and then you burn up the rest of the bean. You see that piece

that's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing, trying to

fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the

wart, and pretty soon off she comes."



"Yes, that's it, Huck--that's it; though when you're burying it if you

say 'Down bean; off wart; come no more to bother me!' it's better.

That's the way Joe Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coonville and

most everywheres. But say--how do you cure 'em with dead cats?"



"Why, you take your cat and go and get in the graveyard 'long about

midnight when somebody that was wicked has been buried; and when it's

midnight a devil will come, or maybe two or three, but you can't see

'em, you can only hear something like the wind, or maybe hear 'em talk;

and when they're taking that feller away, you heave your cat after 'em

and say, 'Devil follow corpse, cat follow devil, warts follow cat, I'm

done with ye!' That'll fetch ANY wart."



"Sounds right. D'you ever try it, Huck?"



"No, but old Mother Hopkins told me."



"Well, I reckon it's so, then. Becuz they say she's a witch."



"Say! Why, Tom, I KNOW she is. She witched pap. Pap says so his own

self. He come along one day, and he see she was a-witching him, so he

took up a rock, and if she hadn't dodged, he'd a got her. Well, that

very night he rolled off'n a shed wher' he was a layin drunk, and broke

his arm."



"Why, that's awful. How did he know she was a-witching him?"



"Lord, pap can tell, easy. Pap says when they keep looking at you

right stiddy, they're a-witching you. Specially if they mumble. Becuz

when they mumble they're saying the Lord's Prayer backards."



"Say, Hucky, when you going to try the cat?"



"To-night. I reckon they'll come after old Hoss Williams to-night."



"But they buried him Saturday. Didn't they get him Saturday night?"



"Why, how you talk! How could their charms work till midnight?--and

THEN it's Sunday. Devils don't slosh around much of a Sunday, I don't

reckon."



"I never thought of that. That's so. Lemme go with you?"



"Of course--if you ain't afeard."



"Afeard! 'Tain't likely. Will you meow?"



"Yes--and you meow back, if you get a chance. Last time, you kep' me

a-meowing around till old Hays went to throwing rocks at me and says

'Dern that cat!' and so I hove a brick through his window--but don't

you tell."



"I won't. I couldn't meow that night, becuz auntie was watching me,

but I'll meow this time. Say--what's that?"



"Nothing but a tick."



"Where'd you get him?"



"Out in the woods."



"What'll you take for him?"



"I don't know. I don't want to sell him."



"All right. It's a mighty small tick, anyway."



"Oh, anybody can run a tick down that don't belong to them. I'm

satisfied with it. It's a good enough tick for me."



"Sho, there's ticks a plenty. I could have a thousand of 'em if I

wanted to."



"Well, why don't you? Becuz you know mighty well you can't. This is a

pretty early tick, I reckon. It's the first one I've seen this year."



"Say, Huck--I'll give you my tooth for him."



"Less see it."



Tom got out a bit of paper and carefully unrolled it. Huckleberry

viewed it wistfully. The temptation was very strong. At last he said:



"Is it genuwyne?"



Tom lifted his lip and showed the vacancy.



"Well, all right," said Huckleberry, "it's a trade."



Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had lately been

the pinchbug's prison, and the boys separated, each feeling wealthier

than before.



When Tom reached the little isolated frame schoolhouse, he strode in

briskly, with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed.

He hung his hat on a peg and flung himself into his seat with

business-like alacrity. The master, throned on high in his great

splint-bottom arm-chair, was dozing, lulled by the drowsy hum of study.

The interruption roused him.



"Thomas Sawyer!"



Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full, it meant trouble.



"Sir!"



"Come up here. Now, sir, why are you late again, as usual?"



Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two long tails of

yellow hair hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric

sympathy of love; and by that form was THE ONLY VACANT PLACE on the

girls' side of the schoolhouse. He instantly said:



"I STOPPED TO TALK WITH HUCKLEBERRY FINN!"



The master's pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly. The buzz of

study ceased. The pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his

mind. The master said:



"You--you did what?"



"Stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn."



There was no mistaking the words.



"Thomas Sawyer, this is the most astounding confession I have ever

listened to. No mere ferule will answer for this offence. Take off your

jacket."



The master's arm performed until it was tired and the stock of

switches notably diminished. Then the order followed:



"Now, sir, go and sit with the girls! And let this be a warning to you."



The titter that rippled around the room appeared to abash the boy, but

in reality that result was caused rather more by his worshipful awe of

his unknown idol and the dread pleasure that lay in his high good

fortune. He sat down upon the end of the pine bench and the girl

hitched herself away from him with a toss of her head. Nudges and winks

and whispers traversed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon

the long, low desk before him, and seemed to study his book.



By and by attention ceased from him, and the accustomed school murmur

rose upon the dull air once more. Presently the boy began to steal

furtive glances at the girl. She observed it, "made a mouth" at him and

gave him the back of her head for the space of a minute. When she

cautiously faced around again, a peach lay before her. She thrust it

away. Tom gently put it back. She thrust it away again, but with less

animosity. Tom patiently returned it to its place. Then she let it

remain. Tom scrawled on his slate, "Please take it--I got more." The

girl glanced at the words, but made no sign. Now the boy began to draw

something on the slate, hiding his work with his left hand. For a time

the girl refused to notice; but her human curiosity presently began to

manifest itself by hardly perceptible signs. The boy worked on,

apparently unconscious. The girl made a sort of noncommittal attempt to

see, but the boy did not betray that he was aware of it. At last she

gave in and hesitatingly whispered:



"Let me see it."



Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two gable

ends to it and a corkscrew of smoke issuing from the chimney. Then the

girl's interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot

everything else. When it was finished, she gazed a moment, then

whispered:



"It's nice--make a man."



The artist erected a man in the front yard, that resembled a derrick.

He could have stepped over the house; but the girl was not

hypercritical; she was satisfied with the monster, and whispered:



"It's a beautiful man--now make me coming along."



Tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw limbs to it and

armed the spreading fingers with a portentous fan. The girl said:



"It's ever so nice--I wish I could draw."



"It's easy," whispered Tom, "I'll learn you."



"Oh, will you? When?"



"At noon. Do you go home to dinner?"



"I'll stay if you will."



"Good--that's a whack. What's your name?"



"Becky Thatcher. What's yours? Oh, I know. It's Thomas Sawyer."



"That's the name they lick me by. I'm Tom when I'm good. You call me

Tom, will you?"



"Yes."



Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from

the girl. But she was not backward this time. She begged to see. Tom

said:



"Oh, it ain't anything."



"Yes it is."



"No it ain't. You don't want to see."



"Yes I do, indeed I do. Please let me."



"You'll tell."



"No I won't--deed and deed and double deed won't."



"You won't tell anybody at all? Ever, as long as you live?"



"No, I won't ever tell ANYbody. Now let me."



"Oh, YOU don't want to see!"



"Now that you treat me so, I WILL see." And she put her small hand

upon his and a little scuffle ensued, Tom pretending to resist in

earnest but letting his hand slip by degrees till these words were

revealed: "I LOVE YOU."



"Oh, you bad thing!" And she hit his hand a smart rap, but reddened

and looked pleased, nevertheless.



Just at this juncture the boy felt a slow, fateful grip closing on his

ear, and a steady lifting impulse. In that vise he was borne across the

house and deposited in his own seat, under a peppering fire of giggles

from the whole school. Then the master stood over him during a few

awful moments, and finally moved away to his throne without saying a

word. But although Tom's ear tingled, his heart was jubilant.



As the school quieted down Tom made an honest effort to study, but the

turmoil within him was too great. In turn he took his place in the

reading class and made a botch of it; then in the geography class and

turned lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers, and rivers into

continents, till chaos was come again; then in the spelling class, and

got "turned down," by a succession of mere baby words, till he brought

up at the foot and yielded up the pewter medal which he had worn with

ostentation for months.







CHAPTER VII



THE harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more his

ideas wandered. So at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he gave it up. It

seemed to him that the noon recess would never come. The air was

utterly dead. There was not a breath stirring. It was the sleepiest of

sleepy days. The drowsing murmur of the five and twenty studying

scholars soothed the soul like the spell that is in the murmur of bees.

Away off in the flaming sunshine, Cardiff Hill lifted its soft green

sides through a shimmering veil of heat, tinted with the purple of

distance; a few birds floated on lazy wing high in the air; no other

living thing was visible but some cows, and they were asleep. Tom's

heart ached to be free, or else to have something of interest to do to

pass the dreary time. His hand wandered into his pocket and his face

lit up with a glow of gratitude that was prayer, though he did not know

it. Then furtively the percussion-cap box came out. He released the

tick and put him on the long flat desk. The creature probably glowed

with a gratitude that amounted to prayer, too, at this moment, but it

was premature: for when he started thankfully to travel off, Tom turned

him aside with a pin and made him take a new direction.



Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just as Tom had been, and

now he was deeply and gratefully interested in this entertainment in an

instant. This bosom friend was Joe Harper. The two boys were sworn

friends all the week, and embattled enemies on Saturdays. Joe took a

pin out of his lapel and began to assist in exercising the prisoner.

The sport grew in interest momently. Soon Tom said that they were

interfering with each other, and neither getting the fullest benefit of

the tick. So he put Joe's slate on the desk and drew a line down the

middle of it from top to bottom.



"Now," said he, "as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and

I'll let him alone; but if you let him get away and get on my side,

you're to leave him alone as long as I can keep him from crossing over."



"All right, go ahead; start him up."



The tick escaped from Tom, presently, and crossed the equator. Joe

harassed him awhile, and then he got away and crossed back again. This

change of base occurred often. While one boy was worrying the tick with

absorbing interest, the other would look on with interest as strong,

the two heads bowed together over the slate, and the two souls dead to

all things else. At last luck seemed to settle and abide with Joe. The

tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as excited and as

anxious as the boys themselves, but time and again just as he would

have victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fingers would be

twitching to begin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off, and keep

possession. At last Tom could stand it no longer. The temptation was

too strong. So he reached out and lent a hand with his pin. Joe was

angry in a moment. Said he:



"Tom, you let him alone."



"I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe."



"No, sir, it ain't fair; you just let him alone."



"Blame it, I ain't going to stir him much."



"Let him alone, I tell you."



"I won't!"



"You shall--he's on my side of the line."



"Look here, Joe Harper, whose is that tick?"



"I don't care whose tick he is--he's on my side of the line, and you

sha'n't touch him."



"Well, I'll just bet I will, though. He's my tick and I'll do what I

blame please with him, or die!"



A tremendous whack came down on Tom's shoulders, and its duplicate on

Joe's; and for the space of two minutes the dust continued to fly from

the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it. The boys had been too

absorbed to notice the hush that had stolen upon the school awhile

before when the master came tiptoeing down the room and stood over

them. He had contemplated a good part of the performance before he

contributed his bit of variety to it.



When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and

whispered in her ear:



"Put on your bonnet and let on you're going home; and when you get to

the corner, give the rest of 'em the slip, and turn down through the

lane and come back. I'll go the other way and come it over 'em the same

way."



So the one went off with one group of scholars, and the other with

another. In a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane, and

when they reached the school they had it all to themselves. Then they

sat together, with a slate before them, and Tom gave Becky the pencil

and held her hand in his, guiding it, and so created another surprising

house. When the interest in art began to wane, the two fell to talking.

Tom was swimming in bliss. He said:



"Do you love rats?"



"No! I hate them!"



"Well, I do, too--LIVE ones. But I mean dead ones, to swing round your

head with a string."



"No, I don't care for rats much, anyway. What I like is chewing-gum."



"Oh, I should say so! I wish I had some now."



"Do you? I've got some. I'll let you chew it awhile, but you must give

it back to me."



That was agreeable, so they chewed it turn about, and dangled their

legs against the bench in excess of contentment.



"Was you ever at a circus?" said Tom.



"Yes, and my pa's going to take me again some time, if I'm good."



"I been to the circus three or four times--lots of times. Church ain't

shucks to a circus. There's things going on at a circus all the time.

I'm going to be a clown in a circus when I grow up."



"Oh, are you! That will be nice. They're so lovely, all spotted up."



"Yes, that's so. And they get slathers of money--most a dollar a day,

Ben Rogers says. Say, Becky, was you ever engaged?"



"What's that?"



"Why, engaged to be married."



"No."



"Would you like to?"



"I reckon so. I don't know. What is it like?"



"Like? Why it ain't like anything. You only just tell a boy you won't

ever have anybody but him, ever ever ever, and then you kiss and that's

all. Anybody can do it."



"Kiss? What do you kiss for?"



"Why, that, you know, is to--well, they always do that."



"Everybody?"



"Why, yes, everybody that's in love with each other. Do you remember

what I wrote on the slate?"



"Ye--yes."



"What was it?"



"I sha'n't tell you."



"Shall I tell YOU?"



"Ye--yes--but some other time."



"No, now."



"No, not now--to-morrow."



"Oh, no, NOW. Please, Becky--I'll whisper it, I'll whisper it ever so

easy."



Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed his arm

about her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly, with his mouth

close to her ear. And then he added:



"Now you whisper it to me--just the same."



She resisted, for a while, and then said:



"You turn your face away so you can't see, and then I will. But you

mustn't ever tell anybody--WILL you, Tom? Now you won't, WILL you?"



"No, indeed, indeed I won't. Now, Becky."



He turned his face away. She bent timidly around till her breath

stirred his curls and whispered, "I--love--you!"



Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches,

with Tom after her, and took refuge in a corner at last, with her

little white apron to her face. Tom clasped her about her neck and

pleaded:



"Now, Becky, it's all done--all over but the kiss. Don't you be afraid

of that--it ain't anything at all. Please, Becky." And he tugged at her

apron and the hands.



By and by she gave up, and let her hands drop; her face, all glowing

with the struggle, came up and submitted. Tom kissed the red lips and

said:



"Now it's all done, Becky. And always after this, you know, you ain't

ever to love anybody but me, and you ain't ever to marry anybody but

me, ever never and forever. Will you?"



"No, I'll never love anybody but you, Tom, and I'll never marry

anybody but you--and you ain't to ever marry anybody but me, either."



"Certainly. Of course. That's PART of it. And always coming to school

or when we're going home, you're to walk with me, when there ain't

anybody looking--and you choose me and I choose you at parties, because

that's the way you do when you're engaged."



"It's so nice. I never heard of it before."



"Oh, it's ever so gay! Why, me and Amy Lawrence--"



The big eyes told Tom his blunder and he stopped, confused.



"Oh, Tom! Then I ain't the first you've ever been engaged to!"



The child began to cry. Tom said:



"Oh, don't cry, Becky, I don't care for her any more."



"Yes, you do, Tom--you know you do."



Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and

turned her face to the wall, and went on crying. Tom tried again, with

soothing words in his mouth, and was repulsed again. Then his pride was

up, and he strode away and went outside. He stood about, restless and

uneasy, for a while, glancing at the door, every now and then, hoping

she would repent and come to find him. But she did not. Then he began

to feel badly and fear that he was in the wrong. It was a hard struggle

with him to make new advances, now, but he nerved himself to it and

entered. She was still standing back there in the corner, sobbing, with

her face to the wall. Tom's heart smote him. He went to her and stood a

moment, not knowing exactly how to proceed. Then he said hesitatingly:



"Becky, I--I don't care for anybody but you."



No reply--but sobs.



"Becky"--pleadingly. "Becky, won't you say something?"



More sobs.



Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of an

andiron, and passed it around her so that she could see it, and said:



"Please, Becky, won't you take it?"



She struck it to the floor. Then Tom marched out of the house and over

the hills and far away, to return to school no more that day. Presently

Becky began to suspect. She ran to the door; he was not in sight; she

flew around to the play-yard; he was not there. Then she called:



"Tom! Come back, Tom!"



She listened intently, but there was no answer. She had no companions

but silence and loneliness. So she sat down to cry again and upbraid

herself; and by this time the scholars began to gather again, and she

had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart and take up the cross

of a long, dreary, aching afternoon, with none among the strangers

about her to exchange sorrows with.







CHAPTER VIII



TOM dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well out of

the track of returning scholars, and then fell into a moody jog. He

crossed a small "branch" two or three times, because of a prevailing

juvenile superstition that to cross water baffled pursuit. Half an hour

later he was disappearing behind the Douglas mansion on the summit of

Cardiff Hill, and the schoolhouse was hardly distinguishable away off

in the valley behind him. He entered a dense wood, picked his pathless

way to the centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot under a spreading

oak. There was not even a zephyr stirring; the dead noonday heat had

even stilled the songs of the birds; nature lay in a trance that was

broken by no sound but the occasional far-off hammering of a

woodpecker, and this seemed to render the pervading silence and sense

of loneliness the more profound. The boy's soul was steeped in

melancholy; his feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings. He

sat long with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands,

meditating. It seemed to him that life was but a trouble, at best, and

he more than half envied Jimmy Hodges, so lately released; it must be

very peaceful, he thought, to lie and slumber and dream forever and

ever, with the wind whispering through the trees and caressing the

grass and the flowers over the grave, and nothing to bother and grieve

about, ever any more. If he only had a clean Sunday-school record he

could be willing to go, and be done with it all. Now as to this girl.

What had he done? Nothing. He had meant the best in the world, and been

treated like a dog--like a very dog. She would be sorry some day--maybe

when it was too late. Ah, if he could only die TEMPORARILY!



But the elastic heart of youth cannot be compressed into one

constrained shape long at a time. Tom presently began to drift

insensibly back into the concerns of this life again. What if he turned

his back, now, and disappeared mysteriously? What if he went away--ever

so far away, into unknown countries beyond the seas--and never came

back any more! How would she feel then! The idea of being a clown

recurred to him now, only to fill him with disgust. For frivolity and

jokes and spotted tights were an offense, when they intruded themselves

upon a spirit that was exalted into the vague august realm of the

romantic. No, he would be a soldier, and return after long years, all

war-worn and illustrious. No--better still, he would join the Indians,

and hunt buffaloes and go on the warpath in the mountain ranges and the

trackless great plains of the Far West, and away in the future come

back a great chief, bristling with feathers, hideous with paint, and

prance into Sunday-school, some drowsy summer morning, with a

bloodcurdling war-whoop, and sear the eyeballs of all his companions

with unappeasable envy. But no, there was something gaudier even than

this. He would be a pirate! That was it! NOW his future lay plain

before him, and glowing with unimaginable splendor. How his name would

fill the world, and make people shudder! How gloriously he would go

plowing the dancing seas, in his long, low, black-hulled racer, the

Spirit of the Storm, with his grisly flag flying at the fore! And at

the zenith of his fame, how he would suddenly appear at the old village

and stalk into church, brown and weather-beaten, in his black velvet

doublet and trunks, his great jack-boots, his crimson sash, his belt

bristling with horse-pistols, his crime-rusted cutlass at his side, his

slouch hat with waving plumes, his black flag unfurled, with the skull

and crossbones on it, and hear with swelling ecstasy the whisperings,

"It's Tom Sawyer the Pirate!--the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main!"



Yes, it was settled; his career was determined. He would run away from

home and enter upon it. He would start the very next morning. Therefore

he must now begin to get ready. He would collect his resources

together. He went to a rotten log near at hand and began to dig under

one end of it with his Barlow knife. He soon struck wood that sounded

hollow. He put his hand there and uttered this incantation impressively:



"What hasn't come here, come! What's here, stay here!"



Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine shingle. He took it

up and disclosed a shapely little treasure-house whose bottom and sides

were of shingles. In it lay a marble. Tom's astonishment was boundless!

He scratched his head with a perplexed air, and said:



"Well, that beats anything!"



Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood cogitating. The

truth was, that a superstition of his had failed, here, which he and

all his comrades had always looked upon as infallible. If you buried a

marble with certain necessary incantations, and left it alone a

fortnight, and then opened the place with the incantation he had just

used, you would find that all the marbles you had ever lost had

gathered themselves together there, meantime, no matter how widely they

had been separated. But now, this thing had actually and unquestionably

failed. Tom's whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations.

He had many a time heard of this thing succeeding but never of its

failing before. It did not occur to him that he had tried it several

times before, himself, but could never find the hiding-places

afterward. He puzzled over the matter some time, and finally decided

that some witch had interfered and broken the charm. He thought he

would satisfy himself on that point; so he searched around till he

found a small sandy spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it.

He laid himself down and put his mouth close to this depression and

called--



"Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know! Doodle-bug,

doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know!"



The sand began to work, and presently a small black bug appeared for a

second and then darted under again in a fright.



"He dasn't tell! So it WAS a witch that done it. I just knowed it."



He well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches, so he

gave up discouraged. But it occurred to him that he might as well have

the marble he had just thrown away, and therefore he went and made a

patient search for it. But he could not find it. Now he went back to

his treasure-house and carefully placed himself just as he had been

standing when he tossed the marble away; then he took another marble

from his pocket and tossed it in the same way, saying:



"Brother, go find your brother!"



He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked. But it must

have fallen short or gone too far; so he tried twice more. The last

repetition was successful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each

other.



Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down the green

aisles of the forest. Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned a

suspender into a belt, raked away some brush behind the rotten log,

disclosing a rude bow and arrow, a lath sword and a tin trumpet, and in

a moment had seized these things and bounded away, barelegged, with

fluttering shirt. He presently halted under a great elm, blew an

answering blast, and then began to tiptoe and look warily out, this way

and that. He said cautiously--to an imaginary company:



"Hold, my merry men! Keep hid till I blow."



Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and elaborately armed as Tom.

Tom called:



"Hold! Who comes here into Sherwood Forest without my pass?"



"Guy of Guisborne wants no man's pass. Who art thou that--that--"



"Dares to hold such language," said Tom, prompting--for they talked

"by the book," from memory.



"Who art thou that dares to hold such language?"



"I, indeed! I am Robin Hood, as thy caitiff carcase soon shall know."



"Then art thou indeed that famous outlaw? Right gladly will I dispute

with thee the passes of the merry wood. Have at thee!"



They took their lath swords, dumped their other traps on the ground,

struck a fencing attitude, foot to foot, and began a grave, careful

combat, "two up and two down." Presently Tom said:



"Now, if you've got the hang, go it lively!"



So they "went it lively," panting and perspiring with the work. By and

by Tom shouted:



"Fall! fall! Why don't you fall?"



"I sha'n't! Why don't you fall yourself? You're getting the worst of

it."



"Why, that ain't anything. I can't fall; that ain't the way it is in

the book. The book says, 'Then with one back-handed stroke he slew poor

Guy of Guisborne.' You're to turn around and let me hit you in the

back."



There was no getting around the authorities, so Joe turned, received

the whack and fell.



"Now," said Joe, getting up, "you got to let me kill YOU. That's fair."



"Why, I can't do that, it ain't in the book."



"Well, it's blamed mean--that's all."



"Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much the miller's son, and

lam me with a quarter-staff; or I'll be the Sheriff of Nottingham and

you be Robin Hood a little while and kill me."



This was satisfactory, and so these adventures were carried out. Then

Tom became Robin Hood again, and was allowed by the treacherous nun to

bleed his strength away through his neglected wound. And at last Joe,

representing a whole tribe of weeping outlaws, dragged him sadly forth,

gave his bow into his feeble hands, and Tom said, "Where this arrow

falls, there bury poor Robin Hood under the greenwood tree." Then he

shot the arrow and fell back and would have died, but he lit on a

nettle and sprang up too gaily for a corpse.



The boys dressed themselves, hid their accoutrements, and went off

grieving that there were no outlaws any more, and wondering what modern

civilization could claim to have done to compensate for their loss.

They said they would rather be outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest than

President of the United States forever.







CHAPTER IX



AT half-past nine, that night, Tom and Sid were sent to bed, as usual.

They said their prayers, and Sid was soon asleep. Tom lay awake and

waited, in restless impatience. When it seemed to him that it must be

nearly daylight, he heard the clock strike ten! This was despair. He

would have tossed and fidgeted, as his nerves demanded, but he was

afraid he might wake Sid. So he lay still, and stared up into the dark.

Everything was dismally still. By and by, out of the stillness, little,

scarcely perceptible noises began to emphasize themselves. The ticking

of the clock began to bring itself into notice. Old beams began to

crack mysteriously. The stairs creaked faintly. Evidently spirits were

abroad. A measured, muffled snore issued from Aunt Polly's chamber. And

now the tiresome chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could

locate, began. Next the ghastly ticking of a deathwatch in the wall at

the bed's head made Tom shudder--it meant that somebody's days were

numbered. Then the howl of a far-off dog rose on the night air, and was

answered by a fainter howl from a remoter distance. Tom was in an

agony. At last he was satisfied that time had ceased and eternity

begun; he began to doze, in spite of himself; the clock chimed eleven,

but he did not hear it. And then there came, mingling with his

half-formed dreams, a most melancholy caterwauling. The raising of a

neighboring window disturbed him. A cry of "Scat! you devil!" and the

crash of an empty bottle against the back of his aunt's woodshed

brought him wide awake, and a single minute later he was dressed and

out of the window and creeping along the roof of the "ell" on all

fours. He "meow'd" with caution once or twice, as he went; then jumped

to the roof of the woodshed and thence to the ground. Huckleberry Finn

was there, with his dead cat. The boys moved off and disappeared in the

gloom. At the end of half an hour they were wading through the tall

grass of the graveyard.



It was a graveyard of the old-fashioned Western kind. It was on a

hill, about a mile and a half from the village. It had a crazy board

fence around it, which leaned inward in places, and outward the rest of

the time, but stood upright nowhere. Grass and weeds grew rank over the

whole cemetery. All the old graves were sunken in, there was not a

tombstone on the place; round-topped, worm-eaten boards staggered over

the graves, leaning for support and finding none. "Sacred to the memory

of" So-and-So had been painted on them once, but it could no longer

have been read, on the most of them, now, even if there had been light.



A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it might be the

spirits of the dead, complaining at being disturbed. The boys talked

little, and only under their breath, for the time and the place and the

pervading solemnity and silence oppressed their spirits. They found the

sharp new heap they were seeking, and ensconced themselves within the

protection of three great elms that grew in a bunch within a few feet

of the grave.



Then they waited in silence for what seemed a long time. The hooting

of a distant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead stillness.

Tom's reflections grew oppressive. He must force some talk. So he said

in a whisper:



"Hucky, do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here?"



Huckleberry whispered:



"I wisht I knowed. It's awful solemn like, AIN'T it?"



"I bet it is."



There was a considerable pause, while the boys canvassed this matter

inwardly. Then Tom whispered:



"Say, Hucky--do you reckon Hoss Williams hears us talking?"



"O' course he does. Least his sperrit does."



Tom, after a pause:



"I wish I'd said Mister Williams. But I never meant any harm.

Everybody calls him Hoss."



"A body can't be too partic'lar how they talk 'bout these-yer dead

people, Tom."



This was a damper, and conversation died again.



