The August procession reached its appointed place in time, and the

solemnities of the Coronation began. They were long and imposing--with

prayers, and anthems, and sermons, and everything that is right for such

occasions; and Joan was at the King's side all these hours, with her

Standard in her hand. But at last came the grand act: the King took the

oath, he was anointed with the sacred oil; a splendid personage, followed

by train-bearers and other attendants, approached, bearing the Crown of

France upon a cushion, and kneeling offered it. The King seemed to

hesitate--in fact, did hesitate; for he put out his hand and then stopped

with it there in the air over the crown, the fingers in the attitude of

taking hold of it. But that was for only a moment--though a moment is a

notable something when it stops the heartbeat of twenty thousand people

and makes them catch their breath. Yes, only a moment; then he caught

Joan's eye, and she gave him a look with all the joy of her thankful

great soul in it; then he smiled, and took the Crown of France in his

hand, and right finely and right royally lifted it up and set it upon his

head.



Then what a crash there was! All about us cries and cheers, and the

chanting of the choirs and groaning of the organ; and outside the

clamoring of the bells and the booming of the cannon. The fantastic

dream, the incredible dream, the impossible dream of the peasant-child

stood fulfilled; the English power was broken, the Heir of France was

crowned.



She was like one transfigured, so divine was the joy that shone in her

face as she sank to her knees at the King's feet and looked up at him

through her tears. Her lips were quivering, and her words came soft and

low and broken:



"Now, O gentle King, is the pleasure of God accomplished according to His

command that you should come to Rheims and receive the crown that

belongeth of right to you, and unto none other. My work which was given

me to do is finished; give me your peace, and let me go back to my

mother, who is poor and old, and has need of me."



The King raised her up, and there before all that host he praised her

great deeds in most noble terms; and there he confirmed her nobility and

titles, making her the equal of a count in rank, and also appointed a

household and officers for her according to her dignity; and then he

said:



"You have saved the crown. Speak--require--demand; and whatsoever grace

you ask it shall be granted, though it make the kingdom poor to meet it."



Now that was fine, that was royal. Joan was on her knees again

straightway, and said:



"Then, O gentle King, if out of your compassion you will speak the word,

I pray you give commandment that my village, poor and hard pressed by

reason of war, may have its taxes remitted."



"It is so commanded. Say on."



"That is all."



"All? Nothing but that?"



"It is all. I have no other desire."



"But that is nothing--less than nothing. Ask--do not be afraid."



"Indeed, I cannot, gentle King. Do not press me. I will not have aught

else, but only this alone."



The King seemed nonplussed, and stood still a moment, as if trying to

comprehend and realize the full stature of this strange unselfishness.

Then he raised his head and said:



"Who has won a kingdom and crowned its King; and all she asks and all she

will take is this poor grace--and even this is for others, not for

herself. And it is well; her act being proportioned to the dignity of one

who carries in her head and heart riches which outvalue any that any King

could add, though he gave his all. She shall have her way. Now,

therefore, it is decreed that from this day forth Domremy, natal village

of Joan of Arc, Deliverer of France, called the Maid of Orleans, is freed

from all taxation forever." Whereat the silver horns blew a jubilant

blast.



There, you see, she had had a vision of this very scene the time she was

in a trance in the pastures of Domremy and we asked her to name to boon

she would demand of the King if he should ever chance to tell her she

might claim one. But whether she had the vision or not, this act showed

that after all the dizzy grandeurs that had come upon her, she was still

the same simple, unselfish creature that she was that day.



Yes, Charles VII. remitted those taxes "forever." Often the gratitude of

kings and nations fades and their promises are forgotten or deliberately

violated; but you, who are children of France, should remember with pride

that France has kept this one faithfully. Sixty-three years have gone by

since that day. The taxes of the region wherein Domremy lies have been

collected sixty-three times since then, and all the villages of that

region have paid except that one--Domremy. The tax-gatherer never visits

Domremy. Domremy has long ago forgotten what that dread sorrow-sowing

apparition is like. Sixty-three tax-books have been filed meantime, and

they lie yonder with the other public records, and any may see them that

desire it. At the top of every page in the sixty-three books stands the

name of a village, and below that name its weary burden of taxation is

figured out and displayed; in the case of all save one. It is true, just

as I tell you. In each of the sixty-three books there is a page headed

"Domremi," but under that name not a figure appears. Where the figures

should be, there are three words written; and the same words have been

written every year for all these years; yes, it is a blank page, with

always those grateful words lettered across the face of it--a touching

memorial. Thus:



__________________________________ | | | DOMREMI | | | |



RIEN--LA PUCELLE | |__________________________________|



"NOTHING--THE MAID OF ORLEANS."



How brief it is; yet how much it says! It is the nation speaking. You

have the spectacle of that unsentimental thing, a Government, making

reverence to that name and saying to its agent, "Uncover, and pass on; it

is France that commands." Yes, the promise has been kept; it will be kept

always; "forever" was the King's word. [1] At two o'clock in the

afternoon the ceremonies of the Coronation came at last to an end; then

the procession formed once more, with Joan and the King at its head, and

took up its solemn march through the midst of the church, all instruments

and all people making such clamor of rejoicing noises as was, indeed, a

marvel to hear. An so ended the third of the great days of Joan's life.

And how close together they stand--May 8th, June 18th, July 17th!



[1] IT was faithfully kept during three hundred and sixty years and more;

then the over-confident octogenarian's prophecy failed. During the tumult

of the French Revolution the promise was forgotten and the grace

withdrawn. It has remained in disuse ever since. Joan never asked to be

remembered, but France has remembered her with an inextinguishable love

and reverence; Joan never asked for a statue, but France has lavished

them upon her; Joan never asked for a church for Domremy, but France is

building one; Joan never asked for saintship, but even that is impending.

Everything which Joan of Arc did not ask for has been given her, and with

a noble profusion; but the one humble little thing which she did ask for

and get has been taken away from her. There is something infinitely

pathetic about this. France owes Domremy a hundred years of taxes, and

could hardly find a citizen within her borders who would vote against the

payment of the debt. -- NOTE BY THE TRANSLATOR.







  36 Joan Hears News from Home



WE MOUNTED and rode, a spectacle to remember, a most noble display of

rich vestments and nodding plumes, and as we moved between the banked

multitudes they sank down all along abreast of us as we advanced, like

grain before the reaper, and kneeling hailed with a rousing welcome the

consecrated King and his companion the Deliverer of France. But by and by

when we had paraded about the chief parts of the city and were come near

to the end of our course, we being now approaching the Archbishop's

palace, one saw on the right, hard by the inn that is called the Zebra, a

strange t--two men not kneeling but standing! Standing in the front rank

of the kneelers; unconscious, transfixed, staring. Yes, and clothed in

the coarse garb of the peasantry, these two. Two halberdiers sprang at

them in a fury to teach them better manners; but just as they seized them

Joan cried out "Forbear!" and slid from her saddle and flung her arms

about one of those peasants, calling him by all manner of endearing

names, and sobbing. For it was her father; and the other was her uncle,

Laxart.



The news flew everywhere, and shouts of welcome were raised, and in just

one little moment those two despised and unknown plebeians were become

famous and popular and envied, and everybody was in a fever to get sight

of them and be able to say, all their lives long, that they had seen the

father of Joan of Arc and the brother of her mother. How easy it was for

her to do miracles like to this! She was like the sun; on whatsoever dim

and humble object her rays fell, that thing was straightway drowned in

glory.



All graciously the King said:



"Bring them to me."



And she brought them; she radiant with happiness and affection, they

trembling and scared, with their caps in their shaking hands; and there

before all the world the King gave them his hand to kiss, while the

people gazed in envy and admiration; and he said to old D'Arc:



"Give God thanks for that you are father to this child, this dispenser of

immortalities. You who bear a name that will still live in the mouths of

men when all the race of kings has been forgotten, it is not meet that

you bare your head before the fleeting fames and dignities of a

day--cover yourself!" And truly he looked right fine and princely when he

said that. Then he gave order that the Bailly of Rheims be brought; and

when he was come, and stood bent low and bare, the King said to him,

"These two are guests of France;" and bade him use them hospitably.



I may as well say now as later, that Papa D'Arc and Laxart were stopping

in that little Zebra inn, and that there they remained. Finer quarters

were offered them by the Bailly, also public distinctions and brave

entertainment; but they were frightened at these projects, they being

only humble and ignorant peasants; so they begged off, and had peace.

They could not have enjoyed such things. Poor souls, they did not even

know what to do with their hands, and it took all their attention to keep

from treading on them. The Bailly did the best he could in the

circumstances. He made the innkeeper place a whole floor at their

disposal, and told him to provide everything they might desire, and

charge all to the city. Also the Bailly gave them a horse apiece and

furnishings; which so overwhelmed them with pride and delight and

astonishment that they couldn't speak a word; for in their lives they had

never dreamed of wealth like this, and could not believe, at first, that

the horses were real and would not dissolve to a mist and blow away. They

could not unglue their minds from those grandeurs, and were always

wrenching the conversation out of its groove and dragging the matter of

animals into it, so that they could say "my horse" here, and "my horse"

there and yonder and all around, and taste the words and lick their chops

over them, and spread their legs and hitch their thumbs in their armpits,

and feel as the good God feels when He looks out on His fleets of

constellations plowing the awful deeps of space and reflects with

satisfaction that they are His--all His. Well, they were the happiest old

children one ever saw, and the simplest.



The city gave a grand banquet to the King and Joan in mid-afternoon, and

to the Court and the Grand Staff; and about the middle of it Pere D'Arc

and Laxart were sent for, but would not venture until it was promised

that they might sit in a gallery and be all by themselves and see all

that was to be seen and yet be unmolested. And so they sat there and

looked down upon the splendid spectacle, and were moved till the tears

ran down their cheeks to see the unbelievable honors that were paid to

their small darling, and how naively serene and unafraid she sat there

with those consuming glories beating upon her.



But at last her serenity was broken up. Yes, it stood the strain of the

King's gracious speech; and of D'Alencon's praiseful words, and the

Bastard's; and even La Hire's thunder-blast, which took the place by

storm; but at last, as I have said, they brought a force to bear which

was too strong for her. For at the close the King put up his hand to

command silence, and so waited, with his hand up, till every sound was

dead and it was as if one could almost  the stillness, so profound it

was. Then out of some remote corner of that vast place there rose a

plaintive voice, and in tones most tender and sweet and rich came

floating through that enchanted hush our poor old simple song "L'Arbre

Fee Bourlemont!" and then Joan broke down and put her face in her hands

and cried. Yes, you see, all in a moment the pomps and grandeurs

dissolved away and she was a little child again herding her sheep with

the tranquil pastures stretched about her, and war and wounds and blood

and death and the mad frenzy and turmoil of battle a dream. Ah, that

shows you the power of music, that magician of magicians, who lifts his

wand and says his mysterious word and all things real pass away and the

phantoms of your mind walk before you clothed in flesh.



That was the King's invention, that sweet and dear surprise. Indeed, he

had fine things hidden away in his nature, though one seldom got a

glimpse of them, with that scheming Tremouille and those others always

standing in the light, and he so indolently content to save himself fuss

and argument and let them have their way.



At the fall of night we the Domremy contingent of the personal staff were

with the father and uncle at the inn, in their private parlor, brewing

generous drinks and breaking ground for a homely talk about Domremy and

the neighbors, when a large parcel arrived from Joan to be kept till she

came; and soon she came herself and sent her guard away, saying she would

take one of her father's rooms and sleep under his roof, and so be at

home again. We of the staff rose and stood, as was meet, until she made

us sit. Then she turned and saw that the two old men had gotten up too,

and were standing in an embarrassed and unmilitary way; which made her

want to laugh, but she kept it in, as not wishing to hurt them; and got

them to their seats and snuggled down between them, and took a hand of

each of them upon her knees and nestled her own hands in them, and said:



"Now we will nave no more ceremony, but be kin and playmates as in other

times; for I am done with the great wars now, and you two will take me

home with you, and I shall see--" She stopped, and for a moment her happy

face sobered, as if a doubt or a presentiment had flitted through her

mind; then it cleared again, and she said, with a passionate yearning,

"Oh, if the day were but come and we could start!"



The old father was surprised, and said:



"Why, child, are you in earnest? Would you leave doing these wonders that

make you to be praised by everybody while there is still so much glory to

be won; and would you go out from this grand comradeship with princes and

generals to be a drudging villager again and a nobody? It is not

rational."



"No," said the uncle, Laxart, "it is amazing to hear, and indeed not

understandable. It is a stranger thing to hear her say she will stop the

soldiering that it was to hear her say she would begin it; and I who

speak to you can say in all truth that that was the strangest word that

ever I had heard till this day and hour. I would it could be explained."



"It is not difficult," said Joan. "I was not ever fond of wounds and

suffering, nor fitted by my nature to inflict them; and quarrelings did

always distress me, and noise and tumult were against my liking, my

disposition being toward peace and quietness, and love for all things

that have life; and being made like this, how could I bear to think of

wars and blood, and the pain that goes with them, and the sorrow and

mourning that follow after? But by his angels God laid His great commands

upon me, and could I disobey? I did as I was bid. Did He command me to do

many things? No; only two: to raise the siege of Orleans, and crown the

King at Rheims. The task is finished, and I am free. Has ever a poor

soldier fallen in my sight, whether friend or foe, and I not felt the

pain in my own body, and the grief of his home-mates in my own heart? No,

not one; and, oh, it is such bliss to know that my release is won, and

that I shall not any more see these cruel things or suffer these tortures

of the mind again! Then why should I not go to my village and be as I was

before? It is heaven! and ye wonder that I desire it. Ah, ye are

men--just men! My mother would understand."



They didn't quite know what to say; so they sat still awhile, looking

pretty vacant. Then old D'Arc said:



"Yes, your mother--that is true. I never saw such a woman. She worries,

and worries, and worries; and wakes nights, and lies so, thinking--that

is, worrying; worrying about you. And when the night storms go raging

along, she moans and says, 'Ah, God pity her, she is out in this with her

poor wet soldiers.' And when the lightning glares and the thunder crashes

she wrings her hands and trembles, saying, 'It is like the awful cannon

and the flash, and yonder somewhere she is riding down upon the spouting

guns and I not there to protect her."



"Ah, poor mother, it is pity, it is pity!"



"Yes, a most strange woman, as I have noticed a many times. When there is

news of a victory and all the village goes mad with pride and joy, she

rushes here and there in a maniacal frenzy till she finds out the one

only thing she cares to know--that you are safe; then down she goes on

her knees in the dirt and praises God as long as there is any breath left

in her body; and all on your account, for she never mentions the battle

once. And always she says, 'Now it is over--now France is saved--now she

will come home'--and always is disappointed and goes about mourning."



"Don't, father! it breaks my heart. I will be so good to her when I get

home. I will do her work for her, and be her comfort, and she shall not

suffer any more through me."



There was some more talk of this sort, then Uncle Laxart said:



"You have done the will of God, dear, and are quits; it is true, and none

may deny it; but what of the King? You are his best soldier; what if he

command you to stay?"



That was a crusher--and sudden! It took Joan a moment or two to recover

from the shock of it; then she said, quite simply and resignedly:



"The King is my Lord; I am his servant." She was silent and thoughtful a

little while, then she brightened up and said, cheerily, "But let us

drive such thoughts away--this is no time for them. Tell me about home."



So the two old gossips talked and talked; talked about everything and

everybody in the village; and it was good to hear. Joan out of her

kindness tried to get us into the conversation, but that failed, of

course. She was the Commander-in-Chief, we were nobodies; her name was

the mightiest in France, we were invisible atoms; she was the comrade of

princes and heroes, we of the humble and obscure; she held rank above all

Personages and all Puissances whatsoever in the whole earth, by right of

baring her commission direct from God. To put it in one word, she was

JOAN OF ARC--and when that is said, all is said. To us she was divine.

Between her and us lay the bridgeless abyss which that word implies. We

could not be familiar with her. No, you can see yourselves that that

would have been impossible.



And yet she was so human, too, and so good and kind and dear and loving

and cheery and charming and unspoiled and unaffected! Those are all the

words I think of now, but they are not enough; no, they are too few and

colorless and meager to tell it all, or tell the half. Those simple old

men didn't realize her; they couldn't; they had never known any people

but human beings, and so they had no other standard to measure her by. To

them, after their first little shyness had worn off, she was just a

girl--that was all. It was amazing. It made one shiver, sometimes, to see

how calm and easy and comfortable they were in her presence, and hear

them talk to her exactly as they would have talked to any other girl in

France.



Why, that simple old Laxart sat up there and droned out the most tedious

and empty tale one ever heard, and neither he nor Papa D'Arc ever gave a

thought to the badness of the etiquette of it, or ever suspected that

that foolish tale was anything but dignified and valuable history. There

was not an atom of value in it; and whilst they thought it distressing

and pathetic, it was in fact not pathetic at all, but actually

ridiculous. At least it seemed so to me, and it seems so yet. Indeed, I

know it was, because it made Joan laugh; and the more sorrowful it got

the more it made her laugh; and the Paladin said that he could have

laughed himself if she had not been there, and Noel Rainguesson said the

same. It was about old Laxart going to a funeral there at Domremy two or

three weeks back. He had spots all over his face and hands, and he got

Joan to rub some healing ointment on them, and while she was doing it,

and comforting him, and trying to say pitying things to him, he told her

how it happened. And first he asked her if she remembered that black bull

calf that she left behind when she came away, and she said indeed she

did, and he was a dear, and she loved him so, and was he well?--and just

drowned him in questions about that creature. And he said it was a young

bull now, and very frisky; and he was to bear a principal hand at a

funeral; and she said, "The bull?" and he said, "No, myself"; but said

the bull did take a hand, but not because of his being invited, for he

wasn't; but anyway he was away over beyond the Fairy Tree, and fell

asleep on the grass with his Sunday funeral clothes on, and a long black

rag on his hat and hanging down his back; and when he woke he saw by the

sun how late it was, and not a moment to lose; and jumped up terribly

worried, and saw the young bull grazing there, and thought maybe he could

ride part way on him and gain time; so he tied a rope around the bull's

body to hold on by, and put a halter on him to steer with, and jumped on

and started; but it was all new to the bull, and he was discontented with

it, and scurried around and bellowed and reared and pranced, and Uncle

Laxart was satisfied, and wanted to get off and go by the next bull or

some other way that was quieter, but he didn't dare try; and it was

getting very warm for him, too, and disturbing and wearisome, and not

proper for Sunday; but by and by the bull lost all his temper, and went

tearing down the slope with his tail in the air and blowing in the most

awful way; and just in the edge of the village he knocked down some

beehives, and the bees turned out and joined the excursion, and soared

along in a black cloud that nearly hid those other two from sight, and

prodded them both, and jabbed them and speared them and spiked them, and

made them bellow and shriek, and shriek and bellow; and here they came

roaring through the village like a hurricane, and took the funeral

procession right in the center, and sent that section of it sprawling,

and galloped over it, and the rest scattered apart and fled screeching in

every direction, every person with a layer of bees on him, and not a rag

of that funeral left but the corpse; and finally the bull broke for the

river and jumped in, and when they fished Uncle Laxart out he was nearly

drowned, and his face looked like a pudding with raisins in it. And then

he turned around, this old simpleton, and looked a long time in a dazed

way at Joan where she had her face in a cushion, dying, apparently, and

says:



"What do you reckon she is laughing at?"



And old D'Arc stood looking at her the same way, sort of absently

scratching his head; but had to give it up, and said he didn't

know--"must have been something that happened when we weren't noticing."



Yes, both of those old people thought that that tale was pathetic;

whereas to my mind it was purely ridiculous, and not in any way valuable

to any one. It seemed so to me then, and it seems so to me yet. And as

for history, it does not resemble history; for the office of history is

to furnish serious and important facts that teach; whereas this strange

and useless event teaches nothing; nothing that I can see, except not to

ride a bull to a funeral; and surely no reflecting person needs to be

taught that.







  37 Again to Arms



NOW THESE were nobles, you know, by decree of the King!--these precious

old infants. But they did not realize it; they could not be called

conscious of it; it was an abstraction, a phantom; to them it had no

substance; their minds could not take hold of it. No, they did not bother

about their nobility; they lived in their horses. The horses were solid;

they were visible facts, and would make a mighty stir in Domremy.

Presently something was said about the Coronation, and old D'Arc said it

was going to be a grand thing to be able to say, when they got home, that

they were present in the very town itself when it happened. Joan looked

troubled, and said:



"Ah, that reminds me. You were here and you didn't send me word. In the

town, indeed! Why, you could have sat with the other nobles, and ben

welcome; and could have looked upon the crowning itself, and carried that

home to tell. Ah, why did you use me so, and send me no word?"



The old father was embarrassed, now, quite visibly embarrassed, and had

the air of one who does not quite know what to say. But Joan was looking

up in his face, her hands upon his shoulders--waiting. He had to speak;

so presently he drew her to his breast, which was heaving with emotion;

and he said, getting out his words with difficulty:



"There, hide your face, child, and let your old father humble himself and

make his confession. I--I--don't you see, don't you understand?--I could

not know that these grandeurs would not turn your young head--it would be

only natural. I might shame you before these great per--"



"Father!"



"And then I was afraid, as remembering that cruel thing I said once in my

sinful anger. Oh, appointed of God to be a soldier, and the greatest in

the land! and in my ignorant anger I said I would drown you with my own

hands if you unsexed yourself and brought shame to your name and family.

Ah, how could I ever have said it, and you so good and dear and innocent!

I was afraid; for I was guilty. You understand it now, my child, and you

forgive?"



Do you see? Even that poor groping old land-crab, with his skull full of

pulp, had pride. Isn't it wonderful? And more--he had conscience; he had

a sense of right and wrong, such as it was; he was able to find remorse.

It looks impossible, it looks incredible, but it is not. I believe that

some day it will be found out that peasants are people. Yes, beings in a

great many respects like ourselves. And I believe that some day they will

find this out, too--and then! Well, then I think they will rise up and

demand to be regarded as part of the race, and that by consequence there

will be trouble. Whenever one sees in a book or in a king's proclamation

those words "the nation," they bring before us the upper classes; only

those; we know no other "nation"; for us and the kings no other "nation"

exists. But from the day that I saw old D'Arc the peasant acting and

feeling just as I should have acted and felt myself, I have carried the

conviction in my heart that our peasants are not merely animals, beasts

of burden put here by the good God to produce food and comfort for the

"nation," but something more and better. You look incredulous. Well, that

is your training; it is the training of everybody; but as for me, I thank

that incident for giving me a better light, and I have never forgotten

it.



Let me see--where was I? One's mind wanders around here and there and

yonder, when one is old. I think I said Joan comforted him. Certainly,

that is what she would do--there was no need to say that. She coaxed him

and petted him and caressed him, and laid the memory of that old hard

speech of his to rest. Laid it to rest until she should be dead. Then he

would remember it again--yes, yes! Lord, how those things sting, and

burn, and gnaw--the things which we did against the innocent dead! And we

say in our anguish, "If they could only come back!" Which is all very

well to say, but, as far as I can see, it doesn't profit anything. In my

opinion the best way is not to do the thing in the first place. And I am

not alone in this; I have heard our two knights say the same thing; and a

man there in Orleans--no, I believe it was at Beaugency, or one of those

places--it seems more as if it was at Beaugency than the others--this man

said the same thing exactly; almost the same words; a dark man with a

cast in his eye and one leg shorter than the other. His name was--was--it

is singular that I can't call that man's name; I had it in my mind only a

moment ago, and I know it begins with--no, I don't remember what it

begins with; but never mind, let it go; I will think of it presently, and

then I will tell you.



Well, pretty soon the old father wanted to know how Joan felt when she

was in the thick of a battle, with the bright blades hacking and flashing

all around her, and the blows rapping and slatting on her shield, and

blood gushing on her from the cloven ghastly face and broken teeth of the

neighbor at her elbow, and the perilous sudden back surge of massed

horses upon a person when the front ranks give way before a heavy rush of

the enemy, and men tumble limp and groaning out of saddles all around,

and battle-flags falling from dead hands wipe across one's face and hide

the tossing turmoil a moment, and in the reeling and swaying and laboring

jumble one's horse's hoofs sink into soft substances and shrieks of pain

respond, and presently--panic! rush! swarm! flight! and death and hell

following after! And the old fellow got ever so much excited; and strode

up and down, his tongue going like a mill, asking question after question

and never waiting for an answer; and finally he stood Joan up in the

middle of the room and stepped off and scanned her critically, and said:



"No--I don't understand it. You are so little. So little and slender.

When you had your armor on, to-day, it gave one a sort of notion of it;

but in these pretty silks and velvets, you are only a dainty page, not a

league-striding war-colossus, moving in clouds and darkness and breathing

smoke and thunder. I would God I might see you at it and go tell your

mother! That would help her sleep, poor thing! Here--teach me the arts of

the soldier, that I may explain them to her."



And she did it. She gave him a pike, and put him through the manual of

arms; and made him do the steps, too. His marching was incredibly awkward

and slovenly, and so was his drill with the pike; but he didn't know it,

and was wonderfully pleased with himself, and mightily excited and

charmed with the ringing, crisp words of command. I am obliged to say

that if looking proud and happy when one is marching were sufficient, he

would have been the perfect soldier.



And he wanted a lesson in sword-play, and got it. But of course that was

beyond him; he was too old. It was beautiful to see Joan handle the

foils, but the old man was a bad failure. He was afraid of the things,

and skipped and dodged and scrambled around like a woman who has lost her

mind on account of the arrival of a bat. He was of no good as an

exhibition. But if La Hire had only come in, that would have been another

matter. Those two fenced often; I saw them many times. True, Joan was

easily his master, but it made a good show for all that, for La Hire was

a grand swordsman. What a swift creature Joan was! You would see her

standing erect with her ankle-bones together and her foil arched over her

head, the hilt in one hand and the button in the other--the old general

opposite, bent forward, left hand reposing on his back, his foil

advanced, slightly wiggling and squirming, his watching eye boring

straight into hers--and all of a sudden she would give a spring forward,

and back again; and there she was, with the foil arched over her head as

before. La Hire had been hit, but all that the spectator saw of it was a

something like a thin flash of light in the air, but nothing distinct,

nothing definite.



We kept the drinkables moving, for that would please the Bailly and the

landlord; and old Laxart and D'Arc got to feeling quite comfortable, but

without being what you could call tipsy. They got out the presents which

they had been buying to carry home--humble things and cheap, but they

would be fine there, and welcome. And they gave to Joan a present from

Pere Fronte and one from her mother--the one a little leaden image of the

Holy Virgin, the other half a yard of blue silk ribbon; and she was as

pleased as a child; and touched, too, as one could see plainly enough.

Yes, she kissed those poor things over and over again, as if they had

been something costly and wonderful; and she pinned the Virgin on her

doublet, and sent for her helmet and tied the ribbon on that; first one

way, then another; then a new way, then another new way; and with each

effort perching the helmet on her hand and holding it off this way and

that, and canting her head to one side and then the other, examining the

effect, as a bird does when it has got a new bug. And she said she could

almost wish she was going to the wars again; for then she would fight

with the better courage, as having always with her something which her

mother's touch had blessed.



Old Laxart said he hoped she would go to the wars again, but home first,

for that all the people there were cruel anxious to see her--and so he

went on:



"They are proud of you, dear. Yes, prouder than any village ever was of

anybody before. And indeed it is right and rational; for it is the first

time a village has ever had anybody like you to be proud of and call its

own. And it is strange and beautiful how they try to give your name to

every creature that has a sex that is convenient. It is but half a year

since you began to be spoken of and left us, and so it is surprising to

see how many babies there are already in that region that are named for

you. First it was just Joan; then it was Joan-Orleans; then

Joan-Orleans-Beaugency-Patay; and now the next ones will have a lot of

towns and the Coronation added, of course. Yes, and the animals the same.

They know how you love animals, and so they try to do you honor and show

their love for you by naming all those creatures after you; insomuch that

if a body should step out and call "Joan of Arc--come!" there would be a

landslide of cats and all such things, each supposing it was the one

wanted, and all willing to take the benefit of the doubt, anyway, for the

sake of the food that might be on delivery. The kitten you left

behind--the last stray you fetched home--bears you name, now, and belongs

to Pere Fronte, and is the pet and pride of the village; and people have

come miles to look at it and pet it and stare at it and wonder over it

because it was Joan of Arc's cat. Everybody will tell you that; and one

day when a stranger threw a stone at it, not knowing it was your cat, the

village rose against him as one man and hanged him! And but for Pere

Fronte--"



There was an interruption. It was a messenger from the King, bearing a

note for Joan, which I read to her, saying he had reflected, and had

consulted his other generals, and was obliged to ask her to remain at the

head of the army and withdraw her resignation. Also, would she come

immediately and attend a council of war? Straightway, at a little

distance, military commands and the rumble of drums broke on the still

night, and we knew that her guard was approaching.



Deep disappointment clouded her face for just one moment and no more--it

passed, and with it the homesick girl, and she was Joan of Arc,

Commander-in-Chief again, and ready for duty.







  38 The King Cries "Forward!"



IN MY double quality of page and secretary I followed Joan to the

council. She entered that presence with the bearing of a grieved goddess.

What was become of the volatile child that so lately was enchanted with a

ribbon and suffocated with laughter over the distress of a foolish

peasant who had stormed a funeral on the back of a bee-stung bull? One

may not guess. Simply it was gone, and had left no sign. She moved

straight to the council-table, and stood. Her glance swept from face to

face there, and where it fell, these lit it as with a torch, those it

scorched as with a brand. She knew where to strike. She indicated the

generals with a nod, and said:



"My business is not with you. You have not craved a council of war." Then

she turned toward the King's privy council, and continued: "No; it is

with you. A council of war! It is amazing. There is but one thing to do,

and only one, and lo, ye call a council of war! Councils of war have no

value but to decide between two or several doubtful courses. But a

council of war when there is only one course? Conceive of a man in a boat

and his family in the water, and he goes out among his friends to ask

what he would better do? A council of war, name of God! To determine

what?"



She stopped, and turned till her eyes rested upon the face of La

Tremouille; and so she stood, silent, measuring him, the excitement in

all faces burning steadily higher and higher, and all pulses beating

faster and faster; then she said, with deliberation:



"Every sane man--whose loyalty is to his King and not a show and a

pretense--knows that there is but one rational thing before us--the march

upon Paris!"



Down came the fist of La Hire with an approving crash upon the table. La

Tremouille turned white with anger, but he pulled himself firmly together

and held his peace. The King's lazy blood was stirred and his eye kindled

finely, for the spirit of war was away down in him somewhere, and a

frank, bold speech always found it and made it tingle gladsomely. Joan

waited to see if the chief minister might wish to defend his position;

but he was experienced and wise, and not a man to waste his forces where

the current was against him. He would wait; the King's private ear would

be at his disposal by and by.



That pious fox the Chancellor of France took the word now. He washed his

soft hands together, smiling persuasively, and said to Joan:



"Would it be courteous, your Excellency, to move abruptly from here

without waiting for an answer from the Duke of Burgundy? You may not know

that we are negotiating with his Highness, and that there is likely to be

a fortnight's truce between us; and on his part a pledge to deliver Paris

into our hands without the cost of a blow or the fatigue of a march

thither."



Joan turned to him and said, gravely:



"This is not a confessional, my lord. You were not obliged to expose that

shame here."



The Chancellor's face reddened, and he retorted:



"Shame? What is there shameful about it?"



Joan answered in level, passionless tones:



"One may describe it without hunting far for words. I knew of this poor

comedy, my lord, although it was not intended that I should know. It is

to the credit of the devisers of it that they tried to conceal it--this

comedy whose text and impulse are describable in two words."



The Chancellor spoke up with a fine irony in his manner:



"Indeed? And will your Excellency be good enough to utter them?"



"Cowardice and treachery!"



The fists of all the generals came down this time, and again the King's

eye sparkled with pleasure. The Chancellor sprang to his feet and

appealed to his Majesty:



"Sire, I claim your protection."



But the King waved him to his seat again, saying:



"Peace. She had a right to be consulted before that thing was undertaken,

since it concerned war as well as politics. It is but just that she be

heard upon it now."



The Chancellor sat down trembling with indignation, and remarked to Joan:



"Out of charity I will consider that you did not know who devised this

measure which you condemn in so candid language."



"Save your charity for another occasion, my lord," said Joan, as calmly

as before. "Whenever anything is done to injure the interests and degrade

the honor of France, all but the dead know how to name the two

conspirators-in-chief--"



"Sir, sire! this insinuation--"



"It is not an insinuation, my lord," said Joan, placidly, "it is a

charge. I bring it against the King's chief minister and his Chancellor."



Both men were on their feet now, insisting that the King modify Joan's

frankness; but he was not minded to do it. His ordinary councils were

stale water--his spirit was drinking wine, now, and the taste of it was

good. He said:



"Sit--and be patient. What is fair for one must in fairness be allowed

the other. Consider--and be just. When have you two spared her? What dark

charges and harsh names have you withheld when you spoke of her?" Then he

added, with a veiled twinkle in his eyes, "If these are offenses I see no

particular difference between them, except that she says her hard things

to your faces, whereas you say yours behind her back."



He was pleased with that neat shot and the way it shriveled those two

people up, and made La Hire laugh out loud and the other generals softly

quake and chuckle. Joan tranquilly resumed:



"From the first, we have been hindered by this policy of shilly-shally;

this fashion of counseling and counseling and counseling where no

counseling is needed, but only fighting. We took Orleans on the 8th of

May, and could have cleared the region round about in three days and

saved the slaughter of Patay. We could have been in Rheims six weeks ago,

and in Paris now; and would see the last Englishman pass out of France in

half a year. But we struck no blow after Orleans, but went off into the

country--what for? Ostensibly to hold councils; really to give Bedford

time to send reinforcements to Talbot--which he did; and Patay had to be

fought. After Patay, more counseling, more waste of precious time. Oh, my

King, I would that you would be persuaded!" She began to warm up, now.

"Once more we have our opportunity. If we rise and strike, all is well.

Bid me march upon Paris. In twenty days it shall be yours, and in six

months all France! Here is half a year's work before us; if this chance

be wasted, I give you twenty years to do it in. Speak the word, O gentle

King--speak but the one--"



"I cry you mercy!" interrupted the Chancellor, who saw a dangerous

enthusiasm rising in the King's face. "March upon Paris? Does your

Excellency forget that the way bristles with English strongholds?"



"That for your English strongholds!" and Joan snapped her fingers

scornfully. "Whence have we marched in these last days? From Gien. And

whither? To Rheims. What bristled between? English strongholds. What are

they now? French ones--and they never cost a blow!" Here applause broke

out from the group of generals, and Joan had to pause a moment to let it

subside. "Yes, English strongholds bristled before us; now French ones

bristle behind us. What is the argument? A child can read it. The

strongholds between us and Paris are garrisoned by no new breed of

English, but by the same breed as those others--with the same fears, the

same questionings, the same weaknesses, the same disposition to see the

heavy hand of God descending upon them. We have but to march!--on the

instant--and they are ours, Paris is ours, France is ours! Give the word,

O my King, command your servant to--"



"Stay!" cried the Chancellor. "It would be madness to put our affront

upon his Highness the Duke of Burgundy. By the treaty which we have every

hope to make with him--"



"Oh, the treaty which we hope to make with him! He has scorned you for

years, and defied you. Is it your subtle persuasions that have softened

his manners and beguiled him to listen to proposals? No; it was

blows!--the blows which we gave him! That is the only teaching that that

sturdy rebel can understand. What does he care for wind? The treaty which

we hope to make with him--alack! He deliver Paris! There is no pauper in

the land that is less able to do it. He deliver Paris! Ah, but that would

make great Bedford smile! Oh, the pitiful pretext! the blind can see that

this thin pour-parler with its fifteen-day truce has no purpose but to

give Bedford time to hurry forward his forces against us. More

treachery--always treachery! We call a council of war--with nothing to

council about; but Bedford calls no council to teach him what our course

is. He knows what he would do in our place. He would hang his traitors

and march upon Paris! O gentle King, rouse! The way is open, Paris

beckons, France implores, Speak and we--"



"Sire, it is madness, sheer madness! Your Excellency, we cannot, we must

not go back from what we have done; we have proposed to treat, we must

treat with the Duke of Burgundy."



"And we will!" said Joan.



"Ah? How?"



"At the point of the lance!"



The house rose, to a man--all that had French hearts--and let go a crack

of applause--and kept it up; and in the midst of it one heard La Hire

growl out: "At the point of the lance! By God, that is music!" The King

was up, too, and drew his sword, and took it by the blade and strode to

Joan and delivered the hilt of it into her hand, saying:



"There, the King surrenders. Carry it to Paris."



And so the applause burst out again, and the historical council of war

that has bred so many legends was over.







 Chapter 39 We Win, But the King Balks



IT WAS away past midnight, and had been a tremendous day in the matter of

excitement and fatigue, but that was no matter to Joan when there was

business on hand. She did not think of bed. The generals followed her to

her official quarters, and she delivered her orders to them as fast as

she could talk, and they sent them off to their different commands as

fast as delivered; wherefore the messengers galloping hither and thither

raised a world of clatter and racket in the still streets; and soon were

added to this the music of distant bugles and the roll of drums--notes of

preparation; for the vanguard would break camp at dawn.



The generals were soon dismissed, but I wasn't; nor Joan; for it was my

turn to work, now. Joan walked the floor and dictated a summons to the

Duke of Burgundy to lay down his arms and make peace and exchange pardons

with the King; or, if he must fight, go fight the Saracens.

"Pardonnez-vous l'un ... l'autre de bon coeligeur, entierement, ainsi que

doivent faire loyaux chretiens, et, s'il vous plait de guerroyer, allez

contre les Sarrasins." It was long, but it was good, and had the sterling

ring to it. It is my opinion that it was as fine and simple and

straightforward and eloquent a state paper as she ever uttered.



It was delivered into the hands of a courier, and he galloped away with

it. The Joan dismissed me, and told me to go to the inn and stay, and in

the morning give to her father the parcel which she had left there. It

contained presents for the Domremy relatives and friends and a peasant

dress which she had bought for herself. She said she would say good-by to

her father and uncle in the morning if it should still be their purpose

to go, instead of tarrying awhile to see the city.



I didn't say anything, of course, but I could have said that wild horses

couldn't keep those men in that town half a day. They waste the glory of

being the first to carry the great news to Domremy--the taxes remitted

forever!--and hear the bells clang and clatter, and the people cheer and

shout? Oh, not they. Patay and Orleans and the Coronation were events

which in a vague way these men understood to be colossal; but they were

colossal mists, films, abstractions; this was a gigantic reality!



When I got there, do you suppose they were abed! Quite the reverse. They

and the rest were as mellow as mellow could be; and the Paladin was doing

his battles in great style, and the old peasants were endangering the

building with their applause. He was doing Patay now; and was bending his

big frame forward and laying out the positions and movements with a rake

here and a rake there of his formidable sword on the floor, and the

peasants were stooped over with their hands on their spread knees

observing with excited eyes and ripping out ejaculations of wonder and

admiration all along:



"Yes, here we were, waiting--waiting for the word; our horses fidgeting

and snorting and dancing to get away, we lying back on the bridles till

our bodies fairly slanted to the rear; the word rang out at last--'Go!'

and we went!



"Went? There was nothing like it ever seen! Where we swept by squads of

scampering English, the mere wind of our passage laid them flat in piles

and rows! Then we plunged into the ruck of Fastolfe's frantic

battle-corps and tore through it like a hurricane, leaving a causeway of

the dead stretching far behind; no tarrying, no slacking rein, but on!

on! on! far yonder in the distance lay our prey--Talbot and his host

looming vast and dark like a storm-cloud brooding on the sea! Down we

swooped upon them, glooming all the air with a quivering pall of dead

leaves flung up by the whirlwind of our flight. In another moment we

should have struck them as world strikes world when disorbited

constellations crash into the Milky way, but by misfortune and the

inscrutable dispensation of God I was recognized! Talbot turned white,

and shouting, 'Save yourselves, it is the Standard-Bearer of Joan of

Arc!' drove his spurs home till they met in the middle of his horse's

entrails, and fled the field with his billowing multitudes at his back! I

could have cursed myself for not putting on a disguise. I saw reproach in

the eyes of her Excellency, and was bitterly ashamed. I had caused what

seemed an irreparable disaster. Another might have gone aside to grieve,

as not seeing any way to mend it; but I thank God I am not of those.

Great occasions only summon as with a trumpet-call the slumbering

reserves of my intellect. I saw my opportunity in an instant--in the next

I was away! Through the woods I vanished--fst!--like an extinguished

light! Away around through the curtaining forest I sped, as if on wings,

none knowing what was become of me, none suspecting my design. Minute

after minute passed, on and on I flew; on, and still on; and at last with

a great cheer I flung my Banner to the breeze and burst out in front of

Talbot! Oh, it was a mighty thought! That weltering chaos of distracted

men whirled and surged backward like a tidal wave which has struck a

continent, and the day was ours! Poor helpless creatures, they were in a

trap; they were surrounded; they could not escape to the rear, for there

was our army; they could not escape to the front, for there was I. Their

hearts shriveled in their bodies, their hands fell listless at their

sides. They stood still, and at our leisure we slaughtered them to a man;

all except Talbot and Fastolfe, whom I saved and brought away, one under

each arm."



Well, there is no denying it, the Paladin was in great form that night.

Such style! such noble grace of gesture, such grandeur of attitude, such

energy when he got going! such steady rise, on such sure wing, such

nicely graduated expenditures of voice according to the weight of the

matter, such skilfully calculated approaches to his surprises and

explosions, such belief-compelling sincerity of tone and manner, such a

climaxing peal from his brazen lungs, and such a lightning-vivid picture

of his mailed form and flaunting banner when he burst out before that

despairing army! And oh, the gentle art of the last half of his last

sentence--delivered in the careless and indolent tone of one who has

finished his real story, and only adds a colorless and inconsequential

detail because it has happened to occur to him in a lazy way.



It was a marvel to see those innocent peasants. Why, they went all to

pieces with enthusiasm, and roared out applauses fit to raise the roof

and wake the dead. When they had cooled down at last and there was

silence but for the heaving and panting, old Laxart said, admiringly:



"As it seems to me, you are an army in your single person."



"Yes, that is what he is," said Noel Rainguesson, convincingly. "He is a

terror; and not just in this vicinity. His mere name carries a shudder

with it to distant lands--just he mere name; and when he frowns, the

shadow of it falls as far as Rome, and the chickens go to roost an hour

before schedule time. Yes; and some say--"



"Noel Rainguesson, you are preparing yourself for trouble. I will say

just one word to you, and it will be to your advantage to--"



I saw that the usual thing had got a start. No man could prophesy when it

would end. So I delivered Joan's message and went off to bed.



Joan made her good-byes to those old fellows in the morning, with loving

embraces and many tears, and with a packed multitude for sympathizers,

and they rode proudly away on their precious horses to carry their great

news home. I had seen better riders, some will say that; for horsemanship

was a new art to them.



The vanguard moved out at dawn and took the road, with bands braying and

banners flying; the second division followed at eight. Then came the

Burgundian ambassadors, and lost us the rest of that day and the whole of

the next. But Joan was on hand, and so they had their journey for their

pains. The rest of us took the road at dawn, next morning, July 20th. And

got how far? Six leagues. Tremouille was getting in his sly work with the

vacillating King, you see. The King stopped at St. Marcoul and prayed

three days. Precious time lost--for us; precious time gained for Bedford.

He would know how to use it.



We could not go on without the King; that would be to leave him in the

conspirators' camp. Joan argued, reasoned, implored; and at last we got

under way again.



Joan's prediction was verified. It was not a campaign, it was only

another holiday excursion. English strongholds lined our route; they

surrendered without a blow; we garrisoned them with Frenchmen and passed

on. Bedford was on the march against us with his new army by this time,

and on the 25th of July the hostile forces faced each other and made

preparation for battle; but Bedford's good judgment prevailed, and he

turned and retreated toward Paris. Now was our chance. Our men were in

great spirits.



Will you believe it? Our poor stick of a King allowed his worthless

advisers to persuade him to start back for Gien, whence he had set out

when we first marched for Rheims and the Coronation! And we actually did

start back. The fifteen-day truce had just been concluded with the Duke

of Burgundy, and we would go and tarry at Gien until he should deliver

Paris to us without a fight.



We marched to Bray; then the King changed his mind once more, and with it

his face toward Paris. Joan dictated a letter to the citizens of Rheims

to encourage them to keep heart in spite of the truce, and promising to

stand by them. She furnished them the news herself that the Kin had made

this truce; and in speaking of it she was her usual frank self. She said

she was not satisfied with it, and didn't know whether she would keep it

or not; that if she kept it, it would be solely out of tenderness for the

King's honor. All French children know those famous words. How naive they

are! "De cette treve qui a ete faite, je ne suis pas contente, et je ne

sais si je la tiendrai. Si je la tiens, ce sera seulement pour garder

l'honneur du roi." But in any case, she said, she would not allow the

blood royal to be abused, and would keep the army in good order and ready

for work at the end of the truce.



Poor child, to have to fight England, Burgundy, and a French conspiracy

all at the same time--it was too bad. She was a match for the others, but

a conspiracy--ah, nobody is a match for that, when the victim that is to

be injured is weak and willing. It grieved her, these troubled days, to

be so hindered and delayed and baffled, and at times she was sad and the

tears lay near the surface. Once, talking with her good old faithful

friend and servant, the Bastard of Orleans, she said:



"Ah, if it might but please God to let me put off this steel raiment and

go back to my father and my mother, and tend my sheep again with my

sister and my brothers, who would be so glad to see me!"



By the 12th of August we were camped near Dampmartin. Later we had a

brush with Bedford's rear-guard, and had hopes of a big battle on the

morrow, but Bedford and all his force got away in the night and went on

toward Paris.



Charles sent heralds and received the submission of Beauvais. The Bishop

Pierre Cauchon, that faithful friend and slave of the English, was not

able to prevent it, though he did his best. He was obscure then, but his

name was to travel round the globe presently, and live forever in the

curses of France! Bear with me now, while I spit in fancy upon his grave.



Compiegne surrendered, and hauled down the English flag. On the 14th we

camped two leagues from Senlis. Bedford turned and approached, and took

up a strong position. We went against him, but all our efforts to beguile

him out from his intrenchments failed, though he had promised us a duel

in the open field. Night shut down. Let him look our for the morning! But

in the morning he was gone again.



We entered Compiegne the 18th of August, turning out the English garrison

and hoisting our own flag.



On the 23d Joan gave command to move upon Paris. The King and the clique

were not satisfied with this, and retired sulking to Senlis, which had

just surrendered. Within a few days many strong places submitted--Creil,

Pont-Saint-Maxence, Choisy, Gournay-sur-Aronde, Remy, Le

Neufville-en-Hez, Moguay, Chantilly, Saintines. The English power was

tumbling, crash after crash! And still the King sulked and disapproved,

and was afraid of our movement against the capital.



On the 26th of August, 1429, Joan camped at St. Denis; in effect, under

the walls of Paris.



And still the King hung back and was afraid. If we could but have had him

there to back us with his authority! Bedford had lost heart and decided

to waive resistance and go an concentrate his strength in the best and

loyalest province remaining to him--Normandy. Ah, if we could only have

persuaded the King to come and countenance us with his presence and

approval at this supreme moment!







  40 Treachery Conquers Joan



COURIER after courier was despatched to the King, and he promised to

come, but didn't. The Duke d'Alencon went to him and got his promise

again, which he broke again. Nine days were lost thus; then he came,

arriving at St. Denis September 7th.



Meantime the enemy had begun to take heart: the spiritless conduct of the

King could have no other result. Preparations had now been made to defend

the city. Joan's chances had been diminished, but she and her generals

considered them plenty good enough yet. Joan ordered the attack for eight

o'clock next morning, and at that hour it began.



Joan placed her artillery and began to pound a strong work which

protected the gate St. Honor,. When it was sufficiently crippled the

assault was sounded at noon, and it was carried by storm. Then we moved

forward to storm the gate itself, and hurled ourselves against it again

and again, Joan in the lead with her standard at her side, the smoke

enveloping us in choking clouds, and the missiles flying over us and

through us as thick as hail.



In the midst of our last assault, which would have carried the gate sure

and given us Paris and in effect France, Joan was struck down by a

crossbow bolt, and our men fell back instantly and almost in a panic--for

what were they without her? She was the army, herself.



Although disabled, she refused to retire, and begged that a new assault

be made, saying it must win; and adding, with the battle-light rising in

her eyes, "I will take Paris now or die!" She had to be carried away by

force, and this was done by Gaucourt and the Duke d'Alencon.



But her spirits were at the very top notch, now. She was brimming with

enthusiasm. She said she would be carried before the gate in the morning,

and in half an hour Paris would be ours without any question. She could

have kept her word. About this there was no doubt. But she forgot one

factor--the King, shadow of that substance named La Tremouille. The King

forbade the attempt!



You see, a new Embassy had just come from the Duke of Burgundy, and

another sham private trade of some sort was on foot.



You would know, without my telling you, that Joan's heart was nearly

broken. Because of the pain of her wound and the pain at her heart she

slept little that night. Several times the watchers heard muffled sobs

from the dark room where she lay at St. Denis, and many times the

grieving words, "It could have been taken!--it could have been taken!"

which were the only ones she said.



She dragged herself out of bed a day later with a new hope. D'Alencon had

thrown a bridge across the Seine near St. Denis. Might she not cross by

that and assault Paris at another point? But the King got wind of it and

broke the bridge down! And more--he declared the campaign ended! And more

still--he had made a new truce and a long one, in which he had agreed to

leave Paris unthreatened and unmolested, and go back to the Loire whence

he had come!



Joan of Arc, who had never been defeated by the enemy, was defeated by

her own King. She had said once that all she feared for her cause was

treachery. It had struck its first blow now. She hung up her white armor

in the royal basilica of St. Denis, and went and asked the King to

relieve her of her functions and let her go home. As usual, she was wise.

Grand combinations, far-reaching great military moves were at an end,

now; for the future, when the truce should end, the war would be merely a

war of random and idle skirmishes, apparently; work suitable for

subalterns, and not requiring the supervision of a sublime military

genius. But the King would not let her go. The truce did not embrace all

France; there were French strongholds to be watched and preserved; he

would need her. Really, you see, Tremouille wanted to keep her where he

could balk and hinder her.



Now came her Voices again. They said, "Remain at St. Denis." There was no

explanation. They did not say why. That was the voice of God; it took

precedence of the command of the King; Joan resolved to stay. But that

filled La Tremouille with dread. She was too tremendous a force to be

left to herself; she would surely defeat all his plans. He beguiled the

King to use compulsion. Joan had to submit--because she was wounded and

helpless. In the Great Trial she said she was carried away against her

will; and that if she had not been wounded it could not have been

accomplished. Ah, she had a spirit, that slender girl! a spirit to brave

all earthly powers and defy them. We shall never know why the Voices

ordered her to stay. We only know this; that if she could have obeyed,

the history of France would not be as it now stands written in the books.

Yes, well we know that.



On the 13th of September the army, sad and spiritless, turned its face

toward the Loire, and marched--without music! Yes, one noted that detail.

It was a funeral march; that is what it was. A long, dreary funeral

march, with never a shout or a cheer; friends looking on in tears, all

the way, enemies laughing. We reached Gien at last--that place whence we

had set out on our splendid march toward Rheims less than three months

before, with flags flying, bands playing, the victory-flush of Patay

glowing in our faces, and the massed multitudes shouting and praising and

giving us godspeed. There was a dull rain falling now, the day was dark,

the heavens mourned, the spectators were few, we had no welcome but the

welcome of silence, and pity, and tears.



Then the King disbanded that noble army of heroes; it furled its flags,

it stored its arms: the disgrace of France was complete. La Tremouille

wore the victor's crown; Joan of Arc, the unconquerable, was conquered.







  41 The Maid Will March No More



YES, IT was as I have said: Joan had Paris and France in her grip, and

the Hundred Years' War under her heel, and the King made her open her

fist and take away her foot.



Now followed about eight months of drifting about with the King and his

council, and his gay and showy and dancing and flirting and hawking and

frolicking and serenading and dissipating court--drifting from town to

town and from castle to castle--a life which was pleasant to us of the

personal staff, but not to Joan. However, she only saw it, she didn't

live it. The King did his sincerest best to make her happy, and showed a

most kind and constant anxiety in this matter.



All others had to go loaded with the chains of an exacting court

etiquette, but she was free, she was privileged. So that she paid her

duty to the King once a day and passed the pleasant word, nothing further

was required of her. Naturally, then, she made herself a hermit, and

grieved the weary days through in her own apartments, with her thoughts

and devotions for company, and the planning of now forever unrealizable

military combinations for entertainment. In fancy she moved bodies of men

from this and that and the other point, so calculating the distances to

be covered, the time required for each body, and the nature of the

country to be traversed, as to have them appear in sight of each other on

a given day or at a given hour and concentrate for battle. It was her

only game, her only relief from her burden of sorrow and inaction. She

played it hour after hour, as others play chess; and lost herself in it,

and so got repose for her mind and healing for her heart.



She never complained, of course. It was not her way. She was the sort

that endure in silence.



But--she was a caged eagle just the same, and pined for the free air and

the alpine heights and the fierce joys of the storm.



France was full of rovers--disbanded soldiers ready for anything that

might turn up. Several times, at intervals, when Joan's dull captivity

grew too heavy to bear, she was allowed to gather a troop of cavalry and

make a health-restoring dash against the enemy. These things were a bath

to her spirits.



It was like old times, there at Saint-Pierre-le-Moutier, to see her lead

assault after assault, be driven back again and again, but always rally

and charge anew, all in a blaze of eagerness and delight; till at last

the tempest of missiles rained so intolerably thick that old D'Aulon, who

was wounded, sounded the retreat (for the King had charged him on his

head to let no harm come to Joan); and away everybody rushed after

him--as he supposed; but when he turned and looked, there were we of the

staff still hammering away; wherefore he rode back and urged her to come,

saying she was mad to stay there with only a dozen men. Her eye danced

merrily, and she turned upon him crying out:



"A dozen men! name of God, I have fifty-thousand, and will never budge

till this place is taken!



"Sound the charge!"



Which he did, and over the walls we went, and the fortress was ours. Old

D'Aulon thought her mind was wandering; but all she meant was, that she

felt the might of fifty thousand men surging in her heart. It was a

fanciful expression; but, to my thinking, truer word was never said.



Then there was the affair near Lagny, where we charged the intrenched

Burgundians through the open field four times, the last time

victoriously; the best prize of it Franquet d'Arras, the free-booter and

pitiless scourge of the region roundabout.



Now and then other such affairs; and at last, away toward the end of May,

1430, we were in the neighborhood of Compiegne, and Joan resolved to go

to the help of that place, which was being besieged by the Duke of

Burgundy.



I had been wounded lately, and was not able to ride without help; but the

good Dwarf took me on behind him, and I held on to him and was safe

enough. We started at midnight, in a sullen downpour of warm rain, and

went slowly and softly and in dead silence, for we had to slip through

the enemy's lines. We were challenged only once; we made no answer, but

held our breath and crept steadily and stealthily along, and got through

without any accident. About three or half past we reached Compiegne, just

as the gray dawn was breaking in the east.



Joan set to work at once, and concerted a plan with Guillaume de Flavy,

captain of the city--a plan for a sortie toward evening against the

enemy, who was posted in three bodies on the other side of the Oise, in

the level plain. From our side one of the city gates communicated with a

bridge. The end of this bridge was defended on the other side of the

river by one of those fortresses called a boulevard; and this boulevard

also commanded a raised road, which stretched from its front across the

plain to the village of Marguy. A force of Burgundians occupied Marguy;

another was camped at Clairoix, a couple of miles above the raised road;

and a body of English was holding Venette, a mile and a half below it. A

kind of bow-and-arrow arrangement, you see; the causeway the arrow, the

boulevard at the feather-end of it, Marguy at the barb, Venette at one

end of the bow, Clairoix at the other.



Joan's plan was to go straight per causeway against Marguy, carry it by

assault, then turn swiftly upon Clairoix, up to the right, and capture

that camp in the same way, then face to the rear and be ready for heavy

work, for the Duke of Burgundy lay behind Clairoix with a reserve.

Flavy's lieutenant, with archers and the artillery of the boulevard, was

to keep the English troops from coming up from below and seizing the

causeway and cutting off Joan's retreat in case she should have to make

one. Also, a fleet of covered boats was to be stationed near the

boulevard as an additional help in case a retreat should become

necessary.



It was the 24th of May. At four in the afternoon Joan moved out at the

head of six hundred cavalry--on her last march in this life!



It breaks my heart. I had got myself helped up onto the walls, and from

there I saw much that happened, the rest was told me long afterward by

our two knights and other eye-witnesses. Joan crossed the bridge, and

soon left the boulevard behind her and went skimming away over the raised

road with her horsemen clattering at her heels. She had on a brilliant

silver-gilt cape over her armor, and I could see it flap and flare and

rise and fall like a little patch of white flame.



It was a bright day, and one could see far and wide over that plain. Soon

we saw the English force advancing, swiftly and in handsome order, the

sunlight flashing from its arms.



Joan crashed into the Burgundians at Marguy and was repulsed. Then she

saw the other Burgundians moving down from Clairoix. Joan rallied her men

and charged again, and was again rolled back. Two assaults occupy a good

deal of time--and time was precious here. The English were approaching

the road now from Venette, but the boulevard opened fire on them and they

were checked. Joan heartened her men with inspiring words and led them to

the charge again in great style. This time she carried Marguy with a

hurrah. Then she turned at once to the right and plunged into the plan

and struck the Clairoix force, which was just arriving; then there was

heavy work, and plenty of it, the two armies hurling each other backward

turn about and about, and victory inclining first to the one, then to the

other. Now all of a sudden thee was a panic on our side. Some say one

thing caused it, some another. Some say the cannonade made our front

ranks think retreat was being cut off by the English, some say the rear

ranks got the idea that Joan was killed. Anyway our men broke, and went

flying in a wild rout for the causeway. Joan tried to rally them and face

them around, crying to them that victory was sure, but it did no good,

they divided and swept by her like a wave. Old D'Aulon begged her to

retreat while there was yet a chance for safety, but she refused; so he

seized her horse's bridle and bore her along with the wreck and ruin in

spite of herself. And so along the causeway they came swarming, that wild

confusion of frenzied men and horses--and the artillery had to stop

firing, of course; consequently the English and Burgundians closed in in

safety, the former in front, the latter behind their prey. Clear to the

boulevard the French were washed in this enveloping inundation; and

there, cornered in an angle formed by the flank of the boulevard and the

slope of the causeway, they bravely fought a hopeless fight, and sank

down one by one.



Flavy, watching from the city wall, ordered the gate to be closed and the

drawbridge raised. This shut Joan out.



The little personal guard around her thinned swiftly. Both of our good

knights went down disabled; Joan's two brothers fell wounded; then Noel

Rainguesson--all wounded while loyally sheltering Joan from blows aimed

at her. When only the Dwarf and the Paladin were left, they would not

give up, but stood their ground stoutly, a pair of steel towers streaked

and splashed with blood; and where the ax of one fell, and the sword of

the other, an enemy gasped and died.



And so fighting, and loyal to their duty to the last, good simple souls,

they came to their honorable end. Peace to their memories! they were very

dear to me.



Then there was a cheer and a rush, and Joan, still defiant, still laying

about her with her sword, was seized by her cape and dragged from her

horse. She was borne away a prisoner to the Duke of Burgundy's camp, and

after her followed the victorious army roaring its joy.



The awful news started instantly on its round; from lip to lip it flew;

and wherever it came it struck the people as with a sort of paralysis;

and they murmured over and over again, as if they were talking to

themselves, or in their sleep, "The Maid of Orleans taken! . . . Joan of

Arc a prisoner! . . . the savior of France lost to us!"--and would keep

saying that over, as if they couldn't understand how it could be, or how

God could permit it, poor creatures!



You know what a city is like when it is hung from eaves to pavement with

rustling black? Then you know what Rouse was like, and some other cities.

But can any man tell you what the mourning in the hearts of the peasantry

of France was like? No, nobody can tell you that, and, poor dumb things,

they could not have told you themselves, but it was there--indeed, yes.

Why, it was the spirit of a whole nation hung with crape!



The 24th of May. We will draw down the curtain now upon the most strange,

and pathetic, and wonderful military drama that has been played upon the

stage of the world. Joan of Arc will march no more.



BOOK III  TRIAL AND MARTYRDOM







  1 The Maid in Chains



I CANNOT bear to dwell at great length upon the shameful history of the

summer and winter following the capture. For a while I was not much

troubled, for I was expecting every day to hear that Joan had been put to

ransom, and that the King--no, not the King, but grateful France--had

come eagerly forward to pay it. By the laws of war she could not be

denied the privilege of ransom. She was not a rebel; she was a

legitimately constituted soldier, head of the armies of France by her

King's appointment, and guilty of no crime known to military law;

therefore she could not be detained upon any pretext, if ransom were

proffered.



But day after day dragged by and no ransom was offered! It seems

incredible, but it is true. Was that reptile Tremouille busy at the

King's ear? All we know is, that the King was silent, and made no offer

and no effort in behalf of this poor girl who had done so much for him.



But, unhappily, there was alacrity enough in another quarter. The news of

the capture reached Paris the day after it happened, and the glad English

and Burgundians deafened the world all the day and all the night with the

clamor of their joy-bells and the thankful thunder of their artillery,

and the next day the Vicar-General of the Inquisition sent a message to

the Duke of Burgundy requiring the delivery of the prisoner into the

hands of the Church to be tried as an idolater.



The English had seen their opportunity, and it was the English power that

was really acting, not the Church. The Church was being used as a blind,

a disguise; and for a forcible reason: the Church was not only able to

take the life of Joan of Arc, but to blight her influence and the

valor-breeding inspiration of her name, whereas the English power could

but kill her body; that would not diminish or destroy the influence of

her name; it would magnify it and make it permanent. Joan of Arc was the

only power in France that the English did not despise, the only power in

France that they considered formidable. If the Church could be brought to

take her life, or to proclaim her an idolater, a heretic, a witch, sent

from Satan, not from heaven, it was believed that the English supremacy

could be at once reinstated.



The Duke of Burgundy listened--but waited. He could not doubt that the

French King or the French people would come forward presently and pay a

higher price than the English. He kept Joan a close prisoner in a strong

fortress, and continued to wait, week after week. He was a French prince,

and was at heart ashamed to sell her to the English. Yet with all his

waiting no offer came to him from the French side.



One day Joan played a cunning truck on her jailer, and not only slipped

out of her prison, but locked him up in it. But as she fled away she was

seen by a sentinel, and was caught and brought back.



Then she was sent to Beaurevoir, a stronger castle. This was early in

August, and she had been in captivity more than two months now. Here she

was shut up in the top of a tower which was sixty feet high. She ate her

heart there for another long stretch--about three months and a half. And

she was aware, all these weary five months of captivity, that the

English, under cover of the Church, were dickering for her as one would

dicker for a horse or a slave, and that France was silent, the King

silent, all her friends the same. Yes, it was pitiful.



And yet when she heard at last that Compiegne was being closely besieged

and likely to be captured, and that the enemy had declared that no

inhabitant of it should escape massacre, not even children of seven years

of age, she was in a fever at once to fly to our rescue. So she tore her

bedclothes to strips and tied them together and descended this frail rope

in the night, and it broke, and she fell and was badly bruised, and

remained three days insensible, meantime neither eating nor drinking.



And now came relief to us, led by the Count of Vend"me, and Compiegne was

saved and the siege raised. This was a disaster to the Duke of Burgundy.

He had to save money now. It was a good time for a new bid to be made for

Joan of Arc. The English at once sent a French bishop--that forever

infamous Pierre Cauchon of Beauvais. He was partly promised the

Archbishopric of Rouen, which was vacant, if he should succeed. He

claimed the right to preside over Joan's ecclesiastical trial because the

battle-ground where she was taken was within his diocese. By the military

usage of the time the ransom of a royal prince was 10,000 livres of gold,

which is 61,125 francs--a fixed sum, you see. It must be accepted when

offered; it could not be refused.



Cauchon brought the offer of this very sum from the English--a royal

prince's ransom for the poor little peasant-girl of Domremy. It shows in

a striking way the English idea of her formidable importance. It was

accepted. For that sum Joan of Arc, the Savior of France, was sold; sold

to her enemies; to the enemies of her country; enemies who had lashed and

thrashed and thumped and trounced France for a century and made holiday

sport of it; enemies who had forgotten, years and years ago, what a

Frenchman's face was like, so used were they to seeing nothing but his

back; enemies whom she had whipped, whom she had cowed, whom she had

taught to respect French valor, new-born in her nation by the breath of

her spirit; enemies who hungered for her life as being the only puissance

able to stand between English triumph and French degradation. Sold to a

French priest by a French prince, with the French King and the French

nation standing thankless by and saying nothing.



And she--what did she say? Nothing. Not a reproach passed her lips. She

was too great for that--she was Joan of Arc; and when that is said, all

is said.



As a soldier, her record was spotless. She could not be called to account

for anything under that head. A subterfuge must be found, and, as we have

seen, was found. She must be tried by priests for crimes against

religion. If none could be discovered, some must be invented. Let the

miscreant Cauchon alone to contrive those.



Rouen was chosen as the scene of the trial. It was in the heart of the

English power; its population had been under English dominion so many

generations that they were hardly French now, save in language. The place

was strongly garrisoned. Joan was taken there near the end of December,

1430, and flung into a dungeon. Yes, and clothed in chains, that free

spirit!



Still France made no move. How do I account for this? I think there is

only one way. You will remember that whenever Joan was not at the front,

the French held back and ventured nothing; that whenever she led, they

swept everything before them, so long as they could see her white armor

or her banner; that every time she fell wounded or was reported

killed--as at Compiegne--they broke in panic and fled like sheep. I argue

from this that they had undergone no real transformation as yet; that at

bottom they were still under the spell of a timorousness born of

generations of unsuccess, and a lack of confidence in each other and in

their leaders born of old and bitter experience in the way of treacheries

of all sorts--for their kings had been treacherous to their great vassals

and to their generals, and these in turn were treacherous to the head of

the state and to each other. The soldiery found that they could depend

utterly on Joan, and upon her alone. With her gone, everything was gone.

She was the sun that melted the frozen torrents and set them boiling;

with that sun removed, they froze again, and the army and all France

became what they had been before, mere dead corpses--that and nothing

more; incapable of thought, hope, ambition, or motion.







  2 Joan Sold to the English



MY WOUND gave me a great deal of trouble clear into the first part of

October; then the fresher weather renewed my life and strength. All this

time there were reports drifting about that the King was going to ransom

Joan. I believed these, for I was young and had not yet found out the

littleness and meanness of our poor human race, which brags about itself

so much, and thinks it is better and higher than the other animals.



In October I was well enough to go out with two sorties, and in the

second one, on the 23d, I was wounded again. My luck had turned, you see.

On the night of the 25th the besiegers decamped, and in the disorder and

confusion one of their prisoners escaped and got safe into Compiegne, and

hobble into my room as pallid and pathetic an object as you would wish to

see.



"What? Alive? Noel Rainguesson!"



It was indeed he. It was a most joyful meeting, that you will easily

know; and also as sad as it was joyful. We could not speak Joan's name.

One's voice would have broken down. We knew who was meant when she was

mentioned; we could say "she" and "her," but we could not speak the name.



We talked of the personal staff. Old D'Aulon, wounded and a prisoner, was

still with Joan and serving her, by permission of the Duke of Burgundy.

Joan was being treated with respect due to her rank and to her character

as a prisoner of war taken in honorable conflict. And this was

continued--as we learned later--until she fell into the hands of that

bastard of Satan, Pierre Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais.



Noel was full of noble and affectionate praises and appreciations of our

old boastful big Standard-Bearer, now gone silent forever, his real and

imaginary battles all fought, his work done, his life honorably closed

and completed.



"And think of his luck!" burst out Noel, with his eyes full of tears.

"Always the pet child of luck!



"See how it followed him and stayed by him, from his first step all

through, in the field or out of it; always a splendid figure in the

public eye, courted and envied everywhere; always having a chance to do

fine things and always doing them; in the beginning called the Paladin in

joke, and called it afterward in earnest because he magnificently made

the title good; and at last--supremest luck of all--died in the field!

died with his harness on; died faithful to his charge the Standard in his

hand; died--oh, think of it--with the approving eye of Joan of Arc upon

him!



"He drained the cup of glory to the last drop, and went jubilant to his

peace, blessedly spared all part in the disaster which was to follow.

What luck, what luck! And we? What was our sin that we are still here, we

who have also earned our place with the happy dead?"



And presently he said:



"They tore the sacred Standard from his dead hand and carried it away,

their most precious prize after its captured owner. But they haven't it

now. A month ago we put our lives upon the risk--our two good knights, my

fellow-prisoners, and I--and stole it, and got it smuggled by trusty

hands to Orleans, and there it is now, safe for all time in the

Treasury."



I was glad and grateful to learn that. I have seen it often since, when I

have gone to Orleans on the 8th of May to be the petted old guest of the

city and hold the first place of honor at the banquets and in the

processions--I mean since Joan's brothers passed from this life. It will

still be there, sacredly guarded by French love, a thousand years from

now--yes, as long as any shred of it hangs together. [1] Two or three

weeks after this talk came the tremendous news like a thunder-clap, and

we were aghast--Joan of Arc sold to the English!



Not for a moment had we ever dreamed of such a thing. We were young, you

see, and did not know the human race, as I have said before. We had been

so proud of our country, so sure of her nobleness, her magnanimity, her

gratitude. We had expected little of the King, but of France we had

expected everything. Everybody knew that in various towns patriot priests

had been marching in procession urging the people to sacrifice money,

property, everything, and buy the freedom of their heaven-sent deliverer.

That the money would be raised we had not thought of doubting.



But it was all over now, all over. It was a bitter time for us. The

heavens seemed hung with black; all cheer went out from our hearts. Was

this comrade here at my bedside really Noel Rainguesson, that

light-hearted creature whose whole life was but one long joke, and who

used up more breath in laughter than in keeping his body alive? No, no;

that Noel I was to see no more. This one's heart was broken. He moved

grieving about, and absently, like one in a dream; the stream of his

laughter was dried at its source.



Well, that was best. It was my own mood. We were company for each other.

He nursed me patiently through the dull long weeks, and at last, in

January, I was strong enough to go about again. Then he said:



"Shall we go now?"



"Yes."



There was no need to explain. Our hearts were in Rouen; we would carry

our bodies there. All that we cared for in this life was shut up in that

fortress. We could not help her, but it would be some solace to us to be

near her, to breathe the air that she breathed, and look daily upon the

stone walls that hid her. What if we should be made prisoners there?

Well, we could but do our best, and let luck and fate decide what should

happen.



And so we started. We could not realize the change which had come upon

the country. We seemed able to choose our own route and go whenever we

pleased, unchallenged and unmolested. When Joan of Arc was in the field

there was a sort of panic of fear everywhere; but now that she was out of

the way, fear had vanished. Nobody was troubled about you or afraid of

you, nobody was curious about you or your business, everybody was

indifferent.



We presently saw that we could take to the Seine, and not weary ourselves

out with land travel.



So we did it, and were carried in a boat to within a league of Rouen.

Then we got ashore; not on the hilly side, but on the other, where it is

as level as a floor. Nobody could enter or leave the city without

explaining himself. It was because they feared attempts at a rescue of

Joan.



We had no trouble. We stopped in the plain with a family of peasants and

stayed a week, helping them with their work for board and lodging, and

making friends of them. We got clothes like theirs, and wore them. When

we had worked our way through their reserves and gotten their confidence,

we found that they secretly harbored French hearts in their bodies. Then

we came out frankly and told them everything, and found them ready to do

anything they could to help us.



Our plan was soon made, and was quite simple. It was to help them drive a

flock of sheep to the market of the city. One morning early we made the

venture in a melancholy drizzle of rain, and passed through the frowning

gates unmolested. Our friends had friends living over a humble wine shop

in a quaint tall building situated in one of the narrow lanes that run

down from the cathedral to the river, and with these they bestowed us;

and the next day they smuggled our own proper clothing and other

belongings to us. The family that lodged us--the Pieroons--were French in

sympathy, and we needed to have no secrets from them.



[1] It remained there three hundred and sixty years, and then was

destroyed in a public bonfire, together with two swords, a plumed cap,

several suits of state apparel, and other relics of the Maid, by a mob in

the time of the Revolution. Nothing which the hand of Joan of Arc is

known to have touched now remains in existence except a few preciously

guarded military and state papers which she signed, her pen being guided

by a clerk or her secretary, Louis de Conte. A boulder exists from which

she is known to have mounted her horse when she was once setting out upon

a campaign. Up to a quarter of a century ago there was a single hair from

her head still in existence. It was drawn through the wax of a seal

attached to the parchment of a state document. It was surreptitiously

snipped out, seal and all, by some vandal relic-hunter, and carried off.

Doubtless it still exists, but only the thief knows where. -- TRANSLATOR.







  3 Weaving the Net About Her



IT WAS necessary for me to have some way to gain bread for Noel and

myself; and when the Pierrons found that I knew how to write, the applied

to their confessor in my behalf, and he got a place for me with a good

priest named Manchon, who was to be the chief recorder in the Great Trial

of Joan of Arc now approaching. It was a strange position for me--clerk

to the recorder--and dangerous if my sympathies and the late employment

should be found out. But there was not much danger. Manchon was at bottom

friendly to Joan and would not betray me; and my name would not, for I

had discarded my surname and retained only my given one, like a person of

low degree.



I attended Manchon constantly straight along, out of January and into

February, and was often in the citadel with him--in the very fortress

where Joan was imprisoned, though not in the dungeon where she was

confined, and so did not see her, of course.



Manchon told me everything that had been happening before my coming. Ever

since the purchase of Joan, Cauchon had been busy packing his jury for

the destruction of the Maid--weeks and weeks he had spent in this bad

industry. The University of Paris had sent him a number of learned and

able and trusty ecclesiastics of the stripe he wanted; and he had scraped

together a clergyman of like stripe and great fame here and there and

yonder, until he was able to construct a formidable court numbering half

a hundred distinguished names. French names they were, but their

interests and sympathies were English.



A great officer of the Inquisition was also sent from Paris for the

accused must be tried by the forms of the Inquisition; but this was a

brave and righteous man, and he said squarely that this court had no

power to try the case, wherefore he refused to act; and the same honest

talk was uttered by two or three others.



The Inquisitor was right. The case as here resurrected against Joan had

already been tried long ago at Poitiers, and decided in her favor. Yes,

and by a higher tribunal than this one, for at the head of it was an

Archbishop--he of Rheims--Cauchon's own metropolitan. So here, you see, a

lower court was impudently preparing to try and redecide a cause which

had already been decided by its superior, a court of higher authority.

Imagine it! No, the case could not properly be tried again. Cauchon could

not properly preside in this new court, for more than one reason:



Rouen was not in his diocese; Joan had not been arrested in her domicile,

which was still Domremy; and finally this proposed judge was the

prisoner's outspoken enemy, and therefore he was incompetent to try her.

Yet all these large difficulties were gotten rid of. The territorial

Chapter of Rouen finally granted territorial letters to Cauchon--though

only after a struggle and under compulsion. Force was also applied to the

Inquisitor, and he was obliged to submit.



So then, the little English King, by his representative, formally

delivered Joan into the hands of the court, but with this reservation: if

the court failed to condemn her, he was to have her back again!  Ah,

dear, what chance was there for that forsaken and friendless child?

Friendless, indeed--it is the right word. For she was in a black dungeon,

with half a dozen brutal common soldiers keeping guard night and day in

the room where her cage was--for she was in a cage; an iron cage, and

chained to her bed by neck and hands and feet. Never a person near her

whom she had ever seen before; never a woman at all. Yes, this was,

indeed, friendlessness.



Now it was a vassal of Jean de Luxembourg who captured Joan and

Compiegne, and it was Jean who sold her to the Duke of Burgundy. Yet this

very De Luxembourg was shameless enough to go and show his face to Joan

in her cage. He came with two English earls, Warwick and Stafford. He was

a poor reptile. He told her he would get her set free if she would

promise not to fight the English any more. She had been in that cage a

long time now, but not long enough to break her spirit. She retorted

scornfully:



"Name of God, you but mock me. I know that you have neither the power nor

the will to do it."



He insisted. Then the pride and dignity of the soldier rose in Joan, and

she lifted her chained hands and let them fall with a clash, saying:



"See these! They know more than you, an can prophesy better. I know that

the English are going to kill me, for they think that when I am dead they

can get the Kingdom of France. It is not so.



"Though there were a hundred thousand of them they would never get it."



This defiance infuriated Stafford, and he--now think of it--he a free,

strong man, she a chained and helpless girl--he drew his dagger and flung

himself at her to stab her. But Warwick seized him and held him back.

Warwick was wise. Take her life in that way? Send her to Heaven stainless

and undisgraced? It would make her the idol of France, and the whole

nation would rise and march to victory and emancipation under the

inspiration of her spirit. No, she must be saved for another fate than

that.



Well, the time was approaching for the Great Trial. For more than two

months Cauchon had been raking and scraping everywhere for any odds and

ends of evidence or suspicion or conjecture that might be usable against

Joan, and carefully suppressing all evidence that came to hand in her

favor. He had limitless ways and means and powers at his disposal for

preparing and strengthening the case for the prosecution, and he used

them all.



But Joan had no one to prepare her case for her, and she was shut up in

those stone walls and had no friend to appeal to for help. And as for

witnesses, she could not call a single one in her defense; they were all

far away, under the French flag, and this was an English court; they

would have been seized and hanged if they had shown their faces at the

gates of Rouen. No, the prisoner must be the sole witness--witness for

the prosecution, witness for the defense; and with a verdict of death

resolved upon before the doors were opened for the court's first sitting.



When she learned that the court was made up of ecclesiastics in the

interest of the English, she begged that in fairness an equal number of

priests of the French party should be added to these.



Cauchon scoffed at her message, and would not even deign to answer it.



By the law of the Church--she being a minor under twenty-one--it was her

right to have counsel to conduct her case, advise her how to answer when

questioned, and protect her from falling into traps set by cunning

devices of the prosecution. She probably did not know that this was her

right, and that she could demand it and require it, for there was none to

tell her that; but she begged for this help, at any rate. Cauchon refused

it. She urged and implored, pleading her youth and her ignorance of the

complexities and intricacies of the law and of legal procedure. Cauchon

refused again, and said she must get along with her case as best she

might by herself. Ah, his heart was a stone.



Cauchon prepared the proces verbal. I will simplify that by calling it

the Bill of Particulars. It was a detailed list of the charges against

her, and formed the basis of the trial. Charges? It was a list of

suspicions and public rumors--those were the words used. It was merely

charged that she was suspected of having been guilty of heresies,

witchcraft, and other such offenses against religion.



Now by the law of the Church, a trial of that sort could not be begun

until a searching inquiry had been made into the history and character of

the accused, and it was essential that the result of this inquiry be

added to the proces verbal and form a part of it. You remember that that

was the first thing they did before the trial at Poitiers. They did it

again now. An ecclesiastic was sent to Domremy. There and all about the

neighborhood he made an exhaustive search into Joan's history and

character, and came back with his verdict. It was very clear. The

searcher reported that he found Joan's character to be in every way what

he "would like his own sister's character to be." Just about the same

report that was brought back to Poitiers, you see. Joan's was a character

which could endure the minutest examination.



This verdict was a strong point for Joan, you will say. Yes, it would

have been if it could have seen the light; but Cauchon was awake, and it

disappeared from the proces verbal before the trial. People were prudent

enough not to inquire what became of it.



One would imagine that Cauchon was ready to begin the trial by this time.

But no, he devised one more scheme for poor Joan's destruction, and it

promised to be a deadly one.



One of the great personages picked out and sent down by the University of

Paris was an ecclesiastic named Nicolas Loyseleur. He was tall, handsome,

grave, of smooth, soft speech and courteous and winning manners. There

was no seeming of treachery or hypocrisy about him, yet he was full of

both. He was admitted to Joan's prison by night, disguised as a cobbler;

he pretended to be from her own country; he professed to be secretly a

patriot; he revealed the fact that he was a priest. She was filled with

gladness to see one from the hills and plains that were so dear to her;

happier still to look upon a priest and disburden her heart in

confession, for the offices of the Church were the bread of life, the

breath of her nostrils to her, and she had been long forced to pine for

them in vain. She opened her whole innocent heart to this creature, and

in return he gave her advice concerning her trial which could have

destroyed her if her deep native wisdom had not protected her against

following it.



You will ask, what value could this scheme have, since the secrets of the

confessional are sacred and cannot be revealed? True--but suppose another

person should overhear them? That person is not bound to keep the secret.

Well, that is what happened. Cauchon had previously caused a hole to be

bored through the wall; and he stood with his ear to that hole and heard

all. It is pitiful to think of these things. One wonders how they could

treat that poor child so. She had not done them any harm.







  4 All Ready to Condemn



ON TUESDAY, the 20th of February, while I sat at my master's work in the

evening, he came in, looking sad, and said it had been decided to begin

the trial at eight o'clock the next morning, and I must get ready to

assist him.



Of course I had been expecting such news every day for many days; but no

matter, the shock of it almost took my breath away and set me trembling

like a leaf. I suppose that without knowing it I had been half imagining

that at the last moment something would happen, something that would stop

this fatal trial; maybe that La Hire would burst in at the gates with his

hellions at his back; maybe that God would have pity and stretch forth

His mighty hand. But now--now there was no hope.



The trial was to begin in the chapel of the fortress and would be public.

So I went sorrowing away and told Noel, so that he might be there early

and secure a place. It would give him a chance to look again upon the

face which we so revered and which was so precious to us. All the way,

both going and coming, I plowed through chattering and rejoicing

multitudes of English soldiery and English-hearted French citizens. There

was no talk but of the coming event. Many times I heard the remark,

accompanied by a pitiless laugh:



"The fat Bishop has got things as he wants them at last, and says he will

lead the vile witch a merry dance and a short one."



But here and there I glimpsed compassion and distress in a face, and it

was not always a French one. English soldiers feared Joan, but they

admired her for her great deeds and her unconquerable spirit.



In the morning Manchon and I went early, yet as we approached the vast

fortress we found crowds of men already there and still others gathering.

The chapel was already full and the way barred against further admissions

of unofficial persons. We took our appointed places. Throned on high sat

the president, Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais, in his grand robes, and

before him in rows sat his robed court--fifty distinguished

ecclesiastics, men of high degree in the Church, of clear-cut

intellectual faces, men of deep learning, veteran adepts in strategy and

casuistry, practised setters of traps for ignorant minds and unwary feet.

When I looked around upon this army of masters of legal fence, gathered

here to find just one verdict and no other, and remembered that Joan must

fight for her good name and her life single-handed against them, I asked

myself what chance an ignorant poor country-girl of nineteen could have

in such an unequal conflict; and my heart sank down low, very low. When I

looked again at that obese president, puffing and wheezing there, his

great belly distending and receding with each breath, and noted his three

chins, fold above fold, and his knobby and knotty face, and his purple

and splotchy complexion, and his repulsive cauliflower nose, and his cold

and malignant eyes--a brute, every detail of him--my heart sank lower

still. And when I noted that all were afraid of this man, and shrank and

fidgeted in their seats when his eye smote theirs, my last poor ray of

hope dissolved away and wholly disappeared.



There was one unoccupied seat in this place, and only one. It was over

against the wall, in view of every one. It was a little wooden bench

without a back, and it stood apart and solitary on a sort of dais. Tall

men-at-arms in morion, breastplate, and steel gauntlets stood as stiff as

their own halberds on each side of this dais, but no other creature was

near by it. A pathetic little bench to me it was, for I knew whom it was

for; and the sight of it carried my mind back to the great court at

Poitiers, where Joan sat upon one like it and calmly fought her cunning

fight with the astonished doctors of the Church and Parliament, and rose

from it victorious and applauded by all, and went forth to fill the world

with the glory of her name.



What a dainty little figure she was, and how gentle and innocent, how

winning and beautiful in the fresh bloom of her seventeen years! Those

were grand days. And so recent--for she was just nineteen now--and how

much she had seen since, and what wonders she had accomplished!



But now--oh, all was changed now. She had been languishing in dungeons,

away from light and air and the cheer of friendly faces, for nearly

three-quarters of a year--she, born child of the sun, natural comrade of

the birds and of all happy free creatures. She would be weary now, and

worn with this long captivity, her forces impaired; despondent, perhaps,

as knowing there was no hope. Yes, all was changed.



All this time there had been a muffled hum of conversation, and rustling

of robes and scraping of feet on the floor, a combination of dull noises

which filled all the place. Suddenly:



"Produce the accused!"



It made me catch my breath. My heart began to thump like a hammer. But

there was silence now--silence absolute. All those noises ceased, and it

was as if they had never been. Not a sound; the stillness grew

oppressive; it was like a weight upon one. All faces were turned toward

the door; and one could properly expect that, for most of the people

there suddenly realized, no doubt, that they were about to see, in actual

flesh and blood, what had been to them before only an embodied prodigy, a

word, a phrase, a world-girdling Name.



The stillness continued. Then, far down the stone-paved corridors, one

heard a vague slow sound approaching: clank . . . clink . . . clank--Joan

of Arc, Deliverer of France, in chains!



My head swam; all things whirled and spun about me. Ah, I was realizing,

too.







  5 Fifty Experts Against a Novice



I GIVE you my honor now that I am not going to distort or discolor the

facts of this miserable trial. No, I will give them to you honestly,

detail by detail, just as Manchon and I set them down daily in the

official record of the court, and just as one may read them in the

printed histories.



There will be only this difference: that in talking familiarly with you

shall use my right to comment upon the proceedings and explain them as I

go along, so that you can understand them better; also, I shall throw in

trifles which came under our eyes and have a certain interest for you and

me, but were not important enough to go into the official record. [1] To

take up my story now where I left off. We heard the clanking of Joan's

chains down the corridors; she was approaching.



Presently she appeared; a thrill swept the house, and one heard deep

breaths drawn. Two guardsmen followed her at a short distance to the

rear. Her head was bowed a little, and she moved slowly, she being weak

and her irons heavy. She had on men's attire--all black; a soft woolen

stuff, intensely black, funereally black, not a speck of relieving color

in it from her throat to the floor. A wide collar of this same black

stuff lay in radiating folds upon her shoulders and breast; the sleeves

of her doublet were full, down to the elbows, and tight thence to her

manacled wrists; below the doublet, tight black hose down to the chains

on her ankles.



Half-way to her bench she stopped, just where a wide shaft of light fell

slanting from a window, and slowly lifted her face. Another thrill!--it

was totally colorless, white as snow; a face of gleaming snow set in

vivid contrast upon that slender statue of somber unmitigated black. It

was smooth and pure and girlish, beautiful beyond belief, infinitely sad

and sweet. But, dear, dear! when the challenge of those untamed eyes fell

upon that judge, and the droop vanished from her form and it straightened

up soldierly and noble, my heart leaped for joy; and I said, all is well,

all is well--they have not broken her, they have not conquered her, she

is Joan of Arc still! Yes, it was plain to me now that there was one

spirit there which this dreaded judge could not quell nor make afraid.



She moved to her place and mounted the dais and seated herself upon her

bench, gathering her chains into her lap and nestling her little white

hands there. Then she waited in tranquil dignity, the only person there

who seemed unmoved and unexcited. A bronzed and brawny English soldier,

standing at martial ease in the front rank of the citizen spectators, did

now most gallantly and respectfully put up his great hand and give her

the military salute; and she, smiling friendly, put up hers and returned

it; whereat there was a sympathetic little break of applause, which the

judge sternly silence.



Now the memorable inquisition called in history the Great Trial began.

Fifty experts against a novice, and no one to help the novice!



The judge summarized the circumstances of the case and the public reports

and suspicions upon which it was based; then he required Joan to kneel

and make oath that she would answer with exact truthfulness to all

questions asked her.



Joan's mind was not asleep. It suspected that dangerous possibilities

might lie hidden under this apparently fair and reasonable demand. She

answered with the simplicity which so often spoiled the enemy's best-laid

plans in the trial at Poitiers, and said:



"No; for I do not know what you are going to ask me; you might ask of me

things which I would not tell you."



This incensed the Court, and brought out a brisk flurry of angry

exclamations. Joan was not disturbed. Cauchon raised his voice and began

to speak in the midst of this noise, but he was so angry that he could

hardly get his words out. He said:



"With the divine assistance of our Lord we require you to expedite these

proceedings for the welfare of your conscience. Swear, with your hands

upon the Gospels, that you will answer true to the questions which shall

be asked you!" and he brought down his fat hand with a crash upon his

official table.



Joan said, with composure:



"As concerning my father and mother, and the faith, and what things I

have done since my coming into France, I will gladly answer; but as

regards the revelations which I have received from God, my Voices have

forbidden me to confide them to any save my King--"



Here there was another angry outburst of threats and expletives, and much

movement and confusion; so she had to stop, and wait for the noise to

subside; then her waxen face flushed a little and she straightened up and

fixed her eye on the judge, and finished her sentence in a voice that had

the old ring to it:



--"and I will never reveal these things though you cut my head off!"



Well, maybe you know what a deliberative body of Frenchmen is like. The

judge and half the court were on their feet in a moment, and all shaking

their fists at the prisoner, and all storming and vituperating at once,

so that you could hardly hear yourself think. They kept this up several

minutes; and because Joan sat untroubled and indifferent they grew madder

and noisier all the time. Once she said, with a fleeting trace of the

old-time mischief in her eye and manner:



"Prithee, speak one at a time, fair lords, then I will answer all of

you."



At the end of three whole hours of furious debating over the oath, the

situation had not changed a jot. The Bishop was still requiring an

unmodified oath, Joan was refusing for the twentieth time to take any

except the one which she had herself proposed. There was a physical

change apparent, but it was confined to the court and judge; they were

hoarse, droopy, exhausted by their long frenzy, and had a sort of haggard

look in their faces, poor men, whereas Joan was still placid and

reposeful and did not seem noticeably tired.



The noise quieted down; there was a waiting pause of some moments'

duration. Then the judge surrendered to the prisoner, and with bitterness

in his voice told her to take the oath after her own fashion. Joan sunk

at once to her knees; and as she laid her hands upon the Gospels, that

big English soldier set free his mind:



"By God, if she were but English, she were not in this place another half

a second!"



It was the soldier in him responding to the soldier in her. But what a

stinging rebuke it was, what an arraignment of French character and

French royalty! Would that he could have uttered just that one phrase in

the hearing of Orleans! I know that that grateful city, that adoring

city, would have risen to the last man and the last woman, and marched

upon Rouen. Some speeches--speeches that shame a man and humble him--burn

themselves into the memory and remain there. That one is burned into

mine.



After Joan had made oath, Cauchon asked her her name, and where she was

born, and some questions about her family; also what her age was. She

answered these. Then he asked her how much education she had.



"I have learned from my mother the Pater Noster, the Ave Maria, and the

Belief. All that I know was taught me by my mother."



Questions of this unessential sort dribbled on for a considerable time.

Everybody was tired out by now, except Joan. The tribunal prepared to

rise. At this point Cauchon forbade Joan to try to escape from prison,

upon pain of being held guilty of the crime of heresy--singular logic!

She answered simply:



"I am not bound by this proposition. If I could escape I would not

reproach myself, for I have given no promise, and I shall not."



Then she complained of the burden of her chains, and asked that they

might be removed, for she was strongly guarded in that dungeon and there

was no need of them. But the Bishop refused, and reminded her that she

had broken out of prison twice before. Joan of Arc was too proud to

insist. She only said, as she rose to go with the guard:



"It is true, I have wanted to escape, and I do want to escape." Then she

added, in a way that would touch the pity of anybody, I think, "It is the

right of every prisoner."



And so she went from the place in the midst of an impressive stillness,

which made the sharper and more distressful to me the clank of those

pathetic chains.



What presence of mind she had! One could never surprise her out of it.

She saw Noel and me there when she first took her seat on the bench, and

we flushed to the forehead with excitement and emotion, but her face

showed nothing, betrayed nothing. Her eyes sought us fifty times that

day, but they passed on and there was never any ray of recognition in

them. Another would have started upon seeing us, and then--why, then

there could have been trouble for us, of course.



We walked slowly home together, each busy with his own grief and saying

not a word.



[1] He kept his word. His account of the Great Trial will be found to be

in strict and detailed accordance with the sworn facts of history.

--TRANSLATOR.







  6 The Maid Baffles Her Persecutors



THAT NIGHT Manchon told me that all through the day's proceedings Cauchon

had had some clerks concealed in the embrasure of a window who were to

make a special report garbling Joan's answers and twisting them from

their right meaning. Ah, that was surely the cruelest man and the most

shameless that has lived in this world. But his scheme failed. Those

clerks had human hearts in them, and their base work revolted them, and

they turned to and boldly made a straight report, whereupon Cauchon curse

them and ordered them out of his presence with a threat of drowning,

which was his favorite and most frequent menace. The matter had gotten

abroad and was making great and unpleasant talk, and Cauchon would not

try to repeat this shabby game right away. It comforted me to hear that.



When we arrived at the citadel next morning, we found that a change had

been made. The chapel had been found too small. The court had now removed

to a noble chamber situated at the end of the great hall of the castle.

The number of judges was increased to sixty-two--one ignorant girl

against such odds, and none to help her.



The prisoner was brought in. She was as white as ever, but she was

looking no whit worse than she looked when she had first appeared the day

before. Isn't it a strange thing? Yesterday she had sat five hours on

that backless bench with her chains in her lap, baited, badgered,

persecuted by that unholy crew, without even the refreshment of a cup of

water--for she was never offered anything, and if I have made you know

her by this time you will know without my telling you that she was not a

person likely to ask favors of those people. And she had spent the night

caged in her wintry dungeon with her chains upon her; yet here she was,

as I say, collected, unworn, and ready for the conflict; yes, and the

only person there who showed no signs of the wear and worry of yesterday.

And her eyes--ah, you should have seen them and broken your hearts. Have

you seen that veiled deep glow, that pathetic hurt dignity, that

unsubdued and unsubduable spirit that burns and smolders in the eye of a

caged eagle and makes you feel mean and shabby under the burden of its

mute reproach? Her eyes were like that. How capable they were, and how

wonderful! Yes, at all times and in all circumstances they could express

as by print every shade of the wide range of her moods. In them were

hidden floods of gay sunshine, the softest and peacefulest twilights, and

devastating storms and lightnings. Not in this world have there been

others that were comparable to them. Such is my opinion, and none that

had the privilege to see them would say otherwise than this which I have

said concerning them.



The seance began. And how did it begin, should you think? Exactly as it

began before--with that same tedious thing which had been settled once,

after so much wrangling. The Bishop opened thus:



"You are required now, to take the oath pure and simple, to answer truly

all questions asked you."



Joan replied placidly:



"I have made oath yesterday, my lord; let that suffice."



The Bishop insisted and insisted, with rising temper; Joan but shook her

head and remained silent. At last she said:



"I made oath yesterday; it is sufficient." Then she sighed and said, "Of

a truth, you do burden me too much."



The Bishop still insisted, still commanded, but he could not move her. At

last he gave it up and turned her over for the day's inquest to an old

hand at tricks and traps and deceptive plausibilities--Beaupere, a doctor

of theology. Now notice the form of this sleek strategist's first

remark--flung out in an easy, offhand way that would have thrown any

unwatchful person off his guard:



"Now, Joan, the matter is very simple; just speak up and frankly and

truly answer the questions which I am going to ask you, as you have sworn

to do."



It was a failure. Joan was not asleep. She saw the artifice. She said:



"No. You could ask me things which I could not tell you--and would not."

Then, reflecting upon how profane and out of character it was for these

ministers of God to be prying into matters which had proceeded from His

hands under the awful seal of His secrecy, she added, with a warning note

in her tone, "If you were well informed concerning me you would wish me

out of your hands. I have done nothing but by revelation."



Beaupere changed his attack, and began an approach from another quarter.

He would slip upon her, you see, under cover of innocent and unimportant

questions.



"Did you learn any trade at home?"



"Yes, to sew and to spin." Then the invincible soldier, victor of Patay,

conqueror of the lion Talbot, deliverer of Orleans, restorer of a king's

crown, commander-in-chief of a nation's armies, straightened herself

proudly up, gave her head a little toss, and said with naive complacency,

"And when it comes to that, I am not afraid to be matched against any

woman in Rouen!"



The crowd of spectators broke out with applause--which pleased Joan--and

there was many a friendly and petting smile to be seen. But Cauchon

stormed at the people and warned them to keep still and mind their

manners.



Beaupere asked other questions. Then:



"Had you other occupations at home?"



"Yes. I helped my mother in the household work and went to the pastures

with the sheep and the cattle."



Her voice trembled a little, but one could hardly notice it. As for me,

it brought those old enchanted days flooding back to me, and I could not

see what I was writing for a little while.



Beaupere cautiously edged along up with other questions toward the

forbidden ground, and finally repeated a question which she had refused

to answer a little while back--as to whether she had received the

Eucharist in those days at other festivals than that of Easter. Joan

merely said:



"Passez outre." Or, as one might say, "Pass on to matters which you are

privileged to pry into."



I heard a member of the court say to a neighbor:



"As a rule, witnesses are but dull creatures, and an easy prey--yes, and

easily embarrassed, easily frightened--but truly one can neither scare

this child nor find her dozing."



Presently the house pricked up its ears and began to listen eagerly, for

Beaupere began to touch upon Joan's Voices, a matter of consuming

interest and curiosity to everybody. His purpose was to trick her into

heedless sayings that could indicate that the Voices had sometimes given

her evil advice--hence that they had come from Satan, you see. To have

dealing with the devil--well, that would send her to the stake in brief

order, and that was the deliberate end and aim of this trial.



"When did you first hear these Voices?"



"I was thirteen when I first heard a Voice coming from God to help me to

live well. I was frightened. It came at midday, in my father's garden in

the summer."



"Had you been fasting?"



"Yes."



"The day before?"



"No."



"From what direction did it come?"



"From the right--from toward the church."



"Did it come with a bright light?"



"Oh, indeed yes. It was brilliant. When I came into France I often heard

the Voices very loud."



"What did the Voice sound like?"



"It was a noble Voice, and I thought it was sent to me from God. The

third time I heard it I recognized it as being an angel's."



"You could understand it?"



"Quite easily. It was always clear."



"What advice did it give you as to the salvation of your soul?"



"It told me to live rightly, and be regular in attendance upon the

services of the Church. And it told me that I must go to France."



"In what species of form did the Voice appear?"



Joan looked suspiciously at he priest a moment, then said, tranquilly:



"As to that, I will not tell you."



"Did the Voice seek you often?"



"Yes. Twice or three times a week, saying, 'Leave your village and go to

France.'"



"Did you father know about your departure?"



"No. The Voice said, 'Go to France'; therefore I could not abide at home

any longer."



"What else did it say?"



"That I should raise the siege of Orleans."



"Was that all?"



"No, I was to go to Vaucouleurs, and Robert de Baudricourt would give me

soldiers to go with me to France; and I answered, saying that I was a

poor girl who did not know how to ride, neither how to fight."



Then she told how she was balked and interrupted at Vaucouleurs, but

finally got her soldiers, and began her march.



"How were you dressed?"



The court of Poitiers had distinctly decided and decreed that as God had

appointed her to do a man's work, it was meet and no scandal to religion

that she should dress as a man; but no matter, this court was ready to

use any and all weapons against Joan, even broken and discredited ones,

and much was going to be made of this one before this trial should end.



"I wore a man's dress, also a sword which Robert de Baudricourt gave me,

but no other weapon."



"Who was it that advised you to wear the dress of a man?"



Joan was suspicious again. She would not answer.



The question was repeated.



She refused again.



"Answer. It is a command!"



"Passez outre," was all she said.



So Beaupere gave up the matter for the present.



"What did Baudricourt say to you when you left?"



"He made them that were to go with me promise to take charge of me, and

to me he said, 'Go, and let happen what may!'" (Advienne que pourra!)

After a good deal of questioning upon other matters she was asked again

about her attire. She said it was necessary for her to dress as a man.



"Did your Voice advise it?"



Joan merely answered placidly:



"I believe my Voice gave me good advice."



It was all that could be got out of her, so the questions wandered to

other matters, and finally to her first meeting with the King at Chinon.

She said she chose out the King, who was unknown to her, by the

revelation of her Voices. All that happened at that time was gone over.

Finally:



"Do you still hear those Voices?"



"They come to me every day."



"What do you ask of them?"



"I have never asked of them any recompense but the salvation of my soul."



"Did the Voice always urge you to follow the army?"



He is creeping upon her again. She answered:



"It required me to remain behind at St. Denis. I would have obeyed if I

had been free, but I was helpless by my wound, and the knights carried me

away by force."



"When were you wounded?"



"I was wounded in the moat before Paris, in the assault."



The next question reveals what Beaupere had been leading up to:



"Was it a feast-day?"



You see? The suggestion that a voice coming from God would hardly advise

or permit the violation, by war and bloodshed, of a sacred day.



Joan was troubled a moment, then she answered yes, it was a feast-day.



"Now, then, tell the this: did you hold it right to make the attack on

such a day?"



This was a shot which might make the first breach in a wall which had

suffered no damage thus far. There was immediate silence in the court and

intense expectancy noticeable all about. But Joan disappointed the house.

She merely made a slight little motion with her hand, as when one brushes

away a fly, and said with reposeful indifference:



"Passez outre."



Smiles danced for a moment in some of the sternest faces there, and

several men even laughed outright. The trap had been long and laboriously

prepared; it fell, and was empty.



The court rose. It had sat for hours, and was cruelly fatigued. Most of

the time had been taken up with apparently idle and purposeless inquiries

about the Chinon events, the exiled Duke of Orleans, Joan's first

proclamation, and so on, but all this seemingly random stuff had really

been sown thick with hidden traps. But Joan had fortunately escaped them

all, some by the protecting luck which attends upon ignorance and

innocence, some by happy accident, the others by force of her best and

surest helper, the clear vision and lightning intuitions of her

extraordinary mind.



Now, then, this daily baiting and badgering of this friendless girl, a

captive in chains, was to continue a long, long time--dignified sport, a

kennel of mastiffs and bloodhounds harassing a kitten!--and I may as well

tell you, upon sworn testimony, what it was like from the first day to

the last. When poor Joan had been in her grave a quarter of a century,

the Pope called together that great court which was to re-examine her

history, and whose just verdict cleared her illustrious name from every

spot and stain, and laid upon the verdict and conduct of our Rouen

tribunal the blight of its everlasting execrations. Manchon and several

of the judges who had been members of our court were among the witnesses

who appeared before that Tribunal of Rehabilitation. Recalling these

miserable proceedings which I have been telling you about, Manchon

testified thus:--here you have it, all in fair print in the unofficial

history:



When Joan spoke of her apparitions she was interrupted at almost every

word. They wearied her with long and multiplied interrogatories upon all

sorts of things. Almost every day the interrogatories of the morning

lasted three or four hours; then from these morning interrogatories they

extracted the particularly difficult and subtle points, and these served

as material for the afternoon interrogatories, which lasted two or three

hours. Moment by moment they skipped from one subject to another; yet in

spite of this she always responded with an astonishing wisdom and memory.

She often corrected the judges, saying, "But I have already answered that

once before--ask the recorder," referring them to me.



And here is the testimony of one of Joan's judges. Remember, these

witnesses are not talking about two or three days, they are talking about

a tedious long procession of days:



They asked her profound questions, but she extricated herself quite well.

Sometimes the questioners changed suddenly and passed on to another

subject to see if she would not contradict herself. They burdened her

with long interrogatories of two or three hours, from which the judges

themselves went forth fatigued. From the snares with which she was beset

the expertest man in the world could not have extricated himself but with

difficulty. She gave her responses with great prudence; indeed to such a

degree that during three weeks I believed she was inspired.



Ah, had she a mind such as I have described? You see what these priests

say under oath--picked men, men chosen for their places in that terrible

court on account of their learning, their experience, their keen and

practised intellects, and their strong bias against the prisoner. They

make that poor country-girl out the match, and more than the match, of

the sixty-two trained adepts. Isn't it so? They from the University of

Paris, she from the sheepfold and the cow-stable!



Ah, yes, she was great, she was wonderful. It took six thousand years to

produce her; her like will not be seen in the earth again in fifty

thousand. Such is my opinion.







  7 Craft That Was in Vain



THE THIRD meeting of the court was in that same spacious chamber, next

day, 24th of February.



How did it begin? In just the same old way. When the preparations were

ended, the robed sixty-two massed in their chairs and the guards and

order-keepers distributed to their stations, Cauchon spoke from his

throne and commanded Joan to lay her hands upon the Gospels and swear to

tell the truth concerning everything asked her!



Joan's eyes kindled, and she rose; rose and stood, fine and noble, and

faced toward the Bishop and said:



"Take care what you do, my lord, you who are my judge, for you take a

terrible responsibility on yourself and you presume too far."



It made a great stir, and Cauchon burst out upon her with an awful

threat--the threat of instant condemnation unless she obeyed. That made

the very bones of my body turn cold, and I saw cheeks about me

blanch--for it meant fire and the stake! But Joan, still standing,

answered him back, proud and undismayed:



"Not all the clergy in Paris and Rouen could condemn me, lacking the

right!"



This made a great tumult, and part of it was applause from the

spectators. Joan resumed her seat.



The Bishop still insisted. Joan said:



"I have already made oath. It is enough."



The Bishop shouted:



"In refusing to swear, you place yourself under suspicion!"



"Let be. I have sword already. It is enough."



The Bishop continued to insist. Joan answered that "she would tell what

she knew--but not all that she knew."



The Bishop plagued her straight along, till at last she said, in a weary

tone:



"I came from God; I have nothing more to do here. Return me to God, from

whom I came."



It was piteous to hear; it was the same as saying, "You only want my

life; take it and let me be at peace."



The Bishop stormed out again:



"Once more I command you to--"



Joan cut in with a nonchalant "Passez outre," and Cauchon retired from

the struggle; but he retired with some credit this time, for he offered a

compromise, and Joan, always clear-headed, saw protection for herself in

it and promptly and willingly accepted it. She was to swear to tell the

truth "as touching the matters et down in the proces verbal." They could

not sail her outside of definite limits, now; her course was over a

charted sea, henceforth. The Bishop had granted more than he had

intended, and more than he would honestly try to abide by.



By command, Beaupere resumed his examination of the accused. It being

Lent, there might be a chance to catch her neglecting some detail of her

religious duties. I could have told him he would fail there. Why,

religion was her life!



"Since when have you eaten or drunk?"



If the least thing had passed her lips in the nature of sustenance,

neither her youth nor the fact that she was being half starved in her

prison could save her from dangerous suspicion of contempt for the

commandments of the Church.



"I have done neither since yesterday at noon."



The priest shifted to the Voices again.



"When have you heard your Voice?"



"Yesterday and to-day."



"At what time?"



"Yesterday it was in the morning."



"What were you doing then?"



"I was asleep and it woke me."



"By touching your arm?"



"No, without touching me."



"Did you thank it? Did you kneel?"



He had Satan in his mind, you see; and was hoping, perhaps, that by and

by it could be shown that she had rendered homage to the arch enemy of

God and man.



"Yes, I thanked it; and knelt in my bed where I was chained, and joined

my hands and begged it to implore God's help for me so that I might have

light and instruction as touching the answers I should give here."



"Then what did the Voice say?"



"It told me to answer boldly, and God would help me." Then she turned

toward Cauchon and said, "You say that you are my judge; now I tell you

again, take care what you do, for in truth I am sent of God and you are

putting yourself in great danger."



Beaupere asked her if the Voice's counsels were not fickle and variable.



"No. It never contradicts itself. This very day it has told me again to

answer boldly."



"Has it forbidden you to answer only part of what is asked you?"



"I will tell you nothing as to that. I have revelations touching the King

my master, and those I will not tell you." Then she was stirred by a

great emotion, and the tears sprang to her eyes and she spoke out as with

strong conviction, saying:



"I believe wholly--as wholly as I believe the Christian faith and that

God has redeemed us from the fires of hell, that God speaks to me by that

Voice!"



Being questioned further concerning the Voice, she said she was not at

liberty to tell all she knew.



"Do you think God would be displeased at your telling the whole truth?"



"The Voice has commanded me to tell the King certain things, and not

you--and some very lately--even last night; things which I would he knew.

He would be more easy at his dinner."



"Why doesn't the Voice speak to the King itself, as it did when you were

with him? Would it not if you asked it?"



"I do not know if it be the wish of God." She was pensive a moment or

two, busy with her thoughts and far away, no doubt; then she added a

remark in which Beaupere, always watchful, always alert, detected a

possible opening--a chance to set a trap. Do you think he jumped at it

instantly, betraying the joy he had in his mind, as a young hand at craft

and artifice would do?



No, oh, no, you could not tell that he had noticed the remark at all. He

slid indifferently away from it at once, and began to ask idle questions

about other things, so as to slip around and spring on it from behind, so

to speak: tedious and empty questions as to whether the Voice had told

her she would escape from this prison; and if it had furnished answers to

be used by her in to-day's seance; if it was accompanied with a glory of

light; if it had eyes, etc. That risky remark of Joan's was this:



"Without the Grace of God I could do nothing."



The court saw the priest's game, and watched his play with a cruel

eagerness. Poor Joan was grown dreamy and absent; possibly she was tired.

Her life was in imminent danger, and she did not suspect it. The time was

ripe now, and Beaupere quietly and stealthily sprang his trap:



"Are you in a state of Grace?"



Ah, we had two or three honorable brave men in that pack of judges; and

Jean Lefevre was one of them. He sprang to his feet and cried out:



"It is a terrible question! The accused is not obliged to answer it!"



Cauchon's face flushed black with anger to see this plank flung to the

perishing child, and he shouted:



"Silence! and take your seat. The accused will answer the question!"



There was no hope, no way out of the dilemma; for whether she said yes or

whether she said no, it would be all the same--a disastrous answer, for

the Scriptures had said one cannot know this thing. Think what hard

hearts they were to set this fatal snare for that ignorant young girl and

be proud of such work and happy in it. It was a miserable moment for me

while we waited; it seemed a year. All the house showed excitement; and

mainly it was glad excitement. Joan looked out upon these hungering faces

with innocent, untroubled eyes, and then humbly and gently she brought

out that immortal answer which brushed the formidable snare away as it

had been but a cobweb:



"If I be not in a state of Grace, I pray God place me in it; if I be in

it, I pray God keep me so."



Ah, you will never see an effect like that; no, not while you live. For a

space there was the silence of the grave. Men looked wondering into each

other's faces, and some were awed and crossed themselves; and I heard

Lefevre mutter:



"It was beyond the wisdom of man to devise that answer. Whence comes this

child's amazing inspirations?"



Beaupere presently took up his work again, but the humiliation of his

defeat weighed upon him, and he made but a rambling and dreary business

of it, he not being able to put any heart in it.



He asked Joan a thousand questions about her childhood and about the oak

wood, and the fairies, and the children's games and romps under our dear

Arbre Fee Bourlemont, and this stirring up of old memories broke her

voice and made her cry a little, but she bore up as well as she could,

and answered everything.



Then the priest finished by touching again upon the matter of her

apparel--a matter which was never to be lost sight of in this still-hunt

for this innocent creature's life, but kept always hanging over her, a

menace charged with mournful possibilities:



"Would you like a woman's dress?"



"Indeed yes, if I may go out from this prison--but here, no."







  8 Joan Tells of Her Visions



THE COURT met next on Monday the 27th. Would you believe it? The Bishop

ignored the contract limiting the examination to matters set down in the

proces verbal and again commanded Joan to take the oath without

reservations. She said:



"You should be content I have sworn enough."



She stood her ground, and Cauchon had to yield.



The examination was resumed, concerning Joan's Voices.



"You have said that you recognized them as being the voices of angels the

third time that you heard them. What angels were they?"



"St. Catherine and St. Marguerite."



"How did you know that it was those two saints? How could you tell the

one from the other?"



"I know it was they; and I know how to distinguish them."



"By what sign?"



"By their manner of saluting me. I have been these seven years under

their direction, and I knew who they were because they told me."



"Whose was the first Voice that came to you when you were thirteen years

old?"



"It was the Voice of St. Michael. I saw him before my eyes; and he was

not alone, but attended by a cloud of angels."



"Did you see the archangel and the attendant angels in the body, or in

the spirit?"



"I saw them with the eyes of my body, just as I see you; and when they

went away I cried because they did not take me with them."



It made me see that awful shadow again that fell dazzling white upon her

that day under l'Arbre Fee de Bourlemont, and it made me shiver again,

though it was so long ago. It was really not very long gone by, but it

seemed so, because so much had happened since.



"In what shape and form did St. Michael appear?"



"As to that, I have not received permission to speak."



"What did the archangel say to you that first time?"



"I cannot answer you to-day."



Meaning, I think, that she would have to get permission of her Voices

first.



Presently, after some more questions as to the revelations which had been

conveyed through her to the King, she complained of the unnecessity of

all this, and said:



"I will say again, as I have said before many times in these sittings,

that I answered all questions of this sort before the court at Poitiers,

and I would hat you wold bring here the record of that court and read

from that. Prithee, send for that book."



There was no answer. It was a subject that had to be got around and put

aside. That book had wisely been gotten out of the way, for it contained

things which would be very awkward here.



Among them was a decision that Joan's mission was from God, whereas it

was the intention of this inferior court to show that it was from the

devil; also a decision permitting Joan to wear male attire, whereas it

was the purpose of this court to make the male attire do hurtful work

against her.



"How was it that you were moved to come into France--by your own desire?"



"Yes, and by command of God. But that it was His will I would note have

come. I would sooner have had my body torn in sunder by horses than come,

lacking that."



Beaupere shifted once more to the matter of the male attire, now, and

proceeded to make a solemn talk about it. That tried Joan's patience; and

presently she interrupted and said:



"It is a trifling thing and of no consequence. And I did not put it on by

counsel of any man, but by command of God."



"Robert de Baudricourt did not order you to wear it?"



"No."



"Did you think you did well in taking the dress of a man?"



"I did well to do whatsoever thing God commanded me to do."



"But in this particular case do you think you did well in taking the

dress of a man?"



"I have done nothing but by command of God."



Beaupere made various attempts to lead her into contradictions of

herself; also to put her words and acts in disaccord with the Scriptures.

But it was lost time. He did not succeed. He returned to her visions, the

light which shone about them, her relations with the King, and so on.



"Was there an angel above the King's head the first time you saw him?"



"By the Blessed Mary!--"



She forced her impatience down, and finished her sentence with

tranquillity: "If there was one I did not see it."



"Was there light?"



"There were more than three thousand soldiers there, and five hundred

torches, without taking account of spiritual light."



"What made the King believe in the revelations which you brought him?"



"He had signs; also the counsel of the clergy."



"What revelations were made to the King?"



"You will not get that out of me this year."



Presently she added: "During three weeks I was questioned by the clergy

at Chinon and Poitiers. The King had a sign before he would believe; and

the clergy were of opinion that my acts were good and not evil."



The subject was dropped now for a while, and Beaupere took up the matter

of the miraculous sword of Fierbois to see if he could not find a chance

there to fix the crime of sorcery upon Joan.



"How did you know that there was an ancient sword buried in the ground

under the rear of the altar of the church of St. Catherine of Fierbois?"



Joan had no concealments to make as to this:



"I knew the sword was there because my Voices told me so; and I sent to

ask that it be given to me to carry in the wars. It seemed to me that it

was not very deep in the ground. The clergy of the church caused it to be

sought for and dug up; and they polished it, and the rust fell easily off

from it."



"Were you wearing it when you were taken in battle at Compiegne?"



"No. But I wore it constantly until I left St. Denis after the attack

upon Paris."



This sword, so mysteriously discovered and so long and so constantly

victorious, was suspected of being under the protection of enchantment.



"Was that sword blest? What blessing had been invoked upon it?"



"None. I loved it because it was found in the church of St. Catherine,

for I loved that church very dearly."



She loved it because it had been built in honor of one of her angels.



"Didn't you lay it upon the altar, to the end that it might be lucky?"

(The altar of St. Denis.) "No."



"Didn't you pray that it might be made lucky?"



"Truly it were no harm to wish that my harness might be fortunate."



"Then it was not that sword which you wore in the field of Compiegne?

What sword did you wear there?"



"The sword of the Burgundian Franquet d'Arras, whom I took prisoner in

the engagement at Lagny. I kept it because it was a good war-sword--good

to lay on stout thumps and blows with."



She said that quite simply; and the contrast between her delicate little

self and the grim soldier words which she dropped with such easy

familiarity from her lips made many spectators smile.



"What is become of the other sword? Where is it now?"



"Is that in the proces verbal?"



Beaupere did not answer.



"Which do you love best, your banner or your sword?"



Her eye lighted gladly at the mention of her banner, and she cried out:



"I love my banner best--oh, forty times more than the sword! Sometimes I

carried it myself when I charged the enemy, to avoid killing any one."

Then she added, naively, and with again that curious contrast between her

girlish little personality and her subject, "I have never killed anyone."



It made a great many smile; and no wonder, when you consider what a

gentle and innocent little thing she looked. One could hardly believe she

had ever even seen men slaughtered, she look so little fitted for such

things.



"In the final assault at Orleans did you tell your soldiers that the

arrows shot by the enemy and the stones discharged from their catapults

would not strike any one but you?"



"No. And the proof its, that more than a hundred of my men were struck. I

told them to have no doubts and no fears; that they would raise the

siege. I was wounded in the neck by an arrow in the assault upon the

bastille that commanded the bridge, but St. Catherine comforted me and I

was cured in fifteen days without having to quit the saddle and leave my

work."



"Did you know that you were going to be wounded?"



"Yes; and I had told it to the King beforehand. I had it from my Voices."



"When you took Jargeau, why did you not put its commandant to ransom?"



"I offered him leave to go out unhurt from the place, with all his

garrison; and if he would not I would take it by storm."



"And you did, I believe."



"Yes."



"Had your Voices counseled you to take it by storm?"



"As to that, I do not remember."



Thus closed a weary long sitting, without result. Every device that could

be contrived to trap Joan into wrong thinking, wrong doing, or disloyalty

to the Church, or sinfulness as a little child at home or later, had been

tried, and none of them had succeeded. She had come unscathed through the

ordeal.



Was the court discouraged? No. Naturally it was very much surprised, very

much astonished, to find its work baffling and difficult instead of

simple and easy, but it had powerful allies in the shape of hunger, cold,

fatigue, persecution, deception, and treachery; and opposed to this array

nothing but a defenseless and ignorant girl who must some time or other

surrender to bodily and mental exhaustion or get caught in one of the

thousand traps set for her.



And had the court made no progress during these seemingly resultless

sittings? Yes. It had been feeling its way, groping here, groping there,

and had found one or two vague trails which might freshen by and by and

lead to something. The male attire, for instance, and the visions and

Voices. Of course no one doubted that she had seen supernatural beings

and been spoken to and advised by them. And of course no one doubted that

by supernatural help miracles had been done by Joan, such as choosing out

the King in a crowd when she had never seen him before, and her discovery

of the sword buried under the altar. It would have been foolish to doubt

these things, for we all know that the air is full of devils and angels

that are visible to traffickers in magic on the one hand and to the

stainlessly holy on the other; but what many and perhaps most did doubt

was, that Joan's visions, Voices, and miracles came from God. It was

hoped that in time they could be proven to have been of satanic origin.

Therefore, as you see, the court's persistent fashion of coming back to

that subject every little while and spooking around it and prying into it

was not to pass the time--it had a strictly business end in view.







  9 Her Sure Deliverance Foretold



THE NEXT sitting opened on Thursday the first of March. Fifty-eight

judges present--the others resting.



As usual, Joan was required to take an oath without reservations. She

showed no temper this time. She considered herself well buttressed by the

proces verbal compromise which Cauchon was so anxious to repudiate and

creep out of; so she merely refused, distinctly and decidedly; and added,

in a spirit of fairness and candor:



"But as to matters set down in the proces verbal, I will freely tell the

whole truth--yes, as freely and fully as if I were before the Pope."



Here was a chance! We had two or three Popes, then; only one of them

could be the true Pope, of course. Everybody judiciously shirked the

question of which was the true Pope and refrained from naming him, it

being clearly dangerous to go into particulars in this matter. Here was

an opportunity to trick an unadvised girl into bringing herself into

peril, and the unfair judge lost no time in taking advantage of it. He

asked, in a plausibly indolent and absent way:



"Which one do you consider to be the true Pope?"



The house took an attitude of deep attention, and so waited to hear the

answer and see the prey walk into the trap. But when the answer came it

covered the judge with confusion, and you could see many people covertly

chuckling. For Joan asked in a voice and manner which almost deceived

even me, so innocent it seemed:



"Are there two?"



One of the ablest priests in that body and one of the best swearers

there, spoke right out so that half the house heard him, and said:



"By God, it was a master stroke!"



As soon as the judge was better of his embarrassment he came back to the

charge, but was prudent and passed by Joan's question:



"Is it true that you received a letter from the Count of Armagnac asking

you which of the three Popes he ought to obey?"



"Yes, and answered it."



Copies of both letters were produced and read. Joan said that hers had

not been quite strictly copied. She said she had received the Count's

letter when she was just mounting her horse; and added:



"So, in dictating a word or two of reply I said I would try to answer him

from Paris or somewhere where I could be at rest."



She was asked again which Pope she had considered the right one.



"I was not able to instruct the Count of Armagnac as to which one he

ought to obey"; then she added, with a frank fearlessness which sounded

fresh and wholesome in that den of trimmers and shufflers, "but as for

me, I hold that we are bound to obey our Lord the Pope who is at Rome."



The matter was dropped. They produced and read a copy of Joan's first

effort at dictating--her proclamation summoning the English to retire

from the siege of Orleans and vacate France--truly a great and fine

production for an unpractised girl of seventeen.



"Do you acknowledge as your own the document which has just been read?"



"Yes, except that there are errors in it--words which make me give myself

too much importance." I saw what was coming; I was troubled and ashamed.

"For instance, I did not say 'Deliver up to the Maid' (rendez au la

Pucelle); I said 'Deliver up to the King' (rendez au Roi); and I did not

call myself 'Commander-in-Chief' (chef de guerre). All those are words

which my secretary substituted; or mayhap he misheard me or forgot what I

said."



She did not look at me when she said it: she spared me that

embarrassment. I hadn't misheard her at all, and hadn't forgotten. I

changed her language purposely, for she was Commander-in-Chief and

entitled to call herself so, and it was becoming and proper, too; and who

was going to surrender anything to the King?--at that time a stick, a

cipher? If any surrendering was done, it would be to the noble Maid of

Vaucouleurs, already famed and formidable though she had not yet struck a

blow.



Ah, there would have been a fine and disagreeable episode (for me) there,

if that pitiless court had discovered that the very scribbler of that

piece of dictation, secretary to Joan of Arc, was present--and not only

present, but helping build the record; and not only that, but destined at

a far distant day to testify against lies and perversions smuggled into

it by Cauchon and deliver them over to eternal infamy!



"Do you acknowledge that you dictated this proclamation?"



"I do."



"Have you repented of it? Do you retract it?"



Ah, then she was indignant!



"No! Not even these chains"--and she shook them--"not even these chains

can chill the hopes that I uttered there. And more!"--she rose, and stood

a moment with a divine strange light kindling in her face, then her words

burst forth as in a flood--"I warn you now that before seven years a

disaster will smite the English, oh, many fold greater than the fall of

Orleans! and--"



"Silence! Sit down!"



"--and then, soon after, they will lose all France!"



Now consider these things. The French armies no longer existed. The

French cause was standing still, our King was standing still, there was

no hint that by and by the Constable Richemont would come forward and

take up the great work of Joan of Arc and finish it. In face of all this,

Joan made that prophecy--made it with perfect confidence--and it came

true.  For within five years Paris fell--1436--and our King marched into

it flying the victor's flag. So the first part of the prophecy was then

fulfilled--in fact, almost the entire prophecy; for, with Paris in our

hands, the fulfilment of the rest of it was assured.



Twenty years later all France was ours excepting a single town--Calais.



Now that will remind you of an earlier prophecy of Joan's. At the time

that she wanted to take Paris and could have done it with ease if our

King had but consented, she said that that was the golden time; that,

with Paris ours, all France would be ours in six months. But if this

golden opportunity to recover France was wasted, said she, "I give you

twenty years to do it in."



She was right. After Paris fell, in 1436, the rest of the work had to be

done city by city, castle by castle, and it took twenty years to finish

it.



Yes, it was the first day of March, 1431, there in the court, that she

stood in the view of everybody and uttered that strange and incredible

prediction. Now and then, in this world, somebody's prophecy turns up

correct, but when you come to look into it there is sure to be

considerable room for suspicion that the prophecy was made after the

fact. But here the matter is different. There in that court Joan's

prophecy was set down in the official record at the hour and moment of

its utterance, years before the fulfilment, and there you may read it to

this day.



Twenty-five years after Joan's death the record was produced in the great

Court of the Rehabilitation and verified under oath by Manchon and me,

and surviving judges of our court confirmed the exactness of the record

in their testimony.



Joan' startling utterance on that now so celebrated first of March

stirred up a great turmoil, and it was some time before it quieted down

again. Naturally, everybody was troubled, for a prophecy is a grisly and

awful thing, whether one thinks it ascends from hell or comes down from

heaven.



All that these people felt sure of was, that the inspiration back of it

was genuine and puissant.



They would have given their right hands to know the source of it.



At last the questions began again.



"How do you know that those things are going to happen?"



"I know it by revelation. And I know it as surely as I know that you sit

here before me."



This sort of answer was not going to allay the spreading uneasiness.

Therefore, after some further dallying the judge got the subject out of

the way and took up one which he could enjoy more.



"What languages do your Voices speak?"



"French."



"St. Marguerite, too?"



"Verily; why not? She is on our side, not on the English!"



Saints and angels who did not condescend to speak English is a grave

affront. They could not be brought into court and punished for contempt,

but the tribunal could take silent note of Joan's remark and remember it

against her; which they did. It might be useful by and by.



"Do your saints and angels wear jewelry?--crowns, rings, earrings?"



To Joan, questions like these were profane frivolities and not worthy of

serious notice; she answered indifferently. But the question brought to

her mind another matter, and she turned upon Cauchon and said:



"I had two rings. They have been taken away from me during my captivity.

You have one of them. It is the gift of my brother. Give it back to me.

If not to me, then I pray that it be given to the Church."



The judges conceived the idea that maybe these rings were for the working

of enchantments.



Perhaps they could be made to do Joan a damage.



"Where is the other ring?"



"The Burgundians have it."



"Where did you get it?"



"My father and mother gave it to me."



"Describe it."



"It is plain and simple and has 'Jesus and Mary' engraved upon it."



Everybody could see that that was not a valuable equipment to do devil's

work with. So that trail was not worth following. Still, to make sure,

one of the judges asked Joan if she had ever cured sick people by

touching them with the ring. She said no.



"Now as concerning the fairies, that were used to abide near by Domremy

whereof there are many reports and traditions. It is said that your

godmother surprised these creatures on a summer's night dancing under the

tree called l'Arbre Fee de Bourlemont. Is it not possible that your

pretended saints and angles are but those fairies?"



"Is that in your proces?"



She made no other answer.



"Have you not conversed with St. Marguerite and St. Catherine under that

tree?"



"I do not know."



"Or by the fountain near the tree?"



"Yes, sometimes."



"What promises did they make you?"



"None but such as they had God's warrant for."



"But what promises did they make?"



"That is not in your proces; yet I will say this much: they told me that

the King would become master of his kingdom in spite of his enemies."



"And what else?"



There was a pause; then she said humbly:



"They promised to lead me to Paradise."



If faces do really betray what is passing in men's minds, a fear came

upon many in that house, at this time, that maybe, after all, a chosen

servant and herald of God was here being hunted to her death. The

interest deepened. Movements and whisperings ceased: the stillness became

almost painful.



Have you noticed that almost from the beginning the nature of the

questions asked Joan showed that in some way or other the questioner very

often already knew his fact before he asked his question? Have you

noticed that somehow or other the questioners usually knew just how and

were to search for Joan's secrets; that they really knew the bulk of her

privacies--a fact not suspected by her--and that they had no task before

them but to trick her into exposing those secrets?



Do you remember Loyseleur, the hypocrite, the treacherous priest, tool of

Cauchon? Do you remember that under the sacred seal of the confessional

Joan freely and trustingly revealed to him everything concerning her

history save only a few things regarding her supernatural revelations

which her Voices had forbidden her to tell to any one--and that the

unjust judge, Cauchon, was a hidden listener all the time?



Now you understand how the inquisitors were able to devise that long

array of minutely prying questions; questions whose subtlety and

ingenuity and penetration are astonishing until we come to remember

Loyseleur's performance and recognize their source. Ah, Bishop of

Beauvais, you are now lamenting this cruel iniquity these many years in

hell! Yes verily, unless one has come to your help. There is but one

among the redeemed that would do it; and it is futile to hope that that

one has not already done it--Joan of Arc.



We will return to the questionings.



"Did they make you still another promise?"



"Yes, but that is not in your proces. I will not tell it now, but before

three months I will tell it you."



The judge seems to know the matter he is asking about, already; one gets

this idea from his next question.



"Did your Voices tell you that you would be liberated before three

months?"



Joan often showed a little flash of surprise at the good guessing of the

judges, and she showed one this time. I was frequently in terror to find

my mind (which I could not control) criticizing the Voices and saying,

"They counsel her to speak boldly--a thing which she would do without any

suggestion from them or anybody else--but when it comes to telling her

any useful thing, such as how these conspirators manage to guess their

way so skilfully into her affairs, they are always off attending to some

other business."



I am reverent by nature; and when such thoughts swept through my head

they made me cold with fear, and if there was a storm and thunder at the

time, I was so ill that I could but with difficulty abide at my post and

do my work.



Joan answered:



"That is not in your proces. I do not know when I shall be set free, but

some who wish me out of this world will go from it before me."



It made some of them shiver.



"Have your Voices told you that you will be delivered from this prison?"



Without a doubt they had, and the judge knew it before he asked the

question.



"Ask me again in three months and I will tell you." She said it with such

a happy look, the tired prisoner! And I? And Noel Rainguesson, drooping

yonder?--why, the floods of joy went streaming through us from crown to

sole! It was all that we could do to hold still and keep from making

fatal exposure of our feelings.



She was to be set free in three months. That was what she meant; we saw

it. The Voices had told her so, and told her true--true to the very

day--May 30th. But we know now that they had mercifully hidden from her

how she was to be set free, but left her in ignorance. Home again!



That day was our understanding of it--Noel's and mine; that was our

dream; and now we would count the days, the hours, the minutes. They

would fly lightly along; they would soon be over.



Yes, we would carry our idol home; and there, far from the pomps and

tumults of the world, we would take up our happy life again and live it

out as we had begun it, in the free air and the sunshine, with the

friendly sheep and the friendly people for comrades, and the grace and

charm of the meadows, the woods, and the river always before our eyes and

their deep peace in our hearts. Yes, that was our dream, the dream that

carried us bravely through that three months to an exact and awful

fulfilment, the though of which would have killed us, I think, if we had

foreknown it and been obliged to bear the burden of it upon our hearts

the half of those weary days.



Our reading of the prophecy was this: We believed the King's soul was

going to be smitten with remorse; and that he would privately plan a

rescue with Joan's old lieutenants, D'Alencon and the Bastard and La

Hire, and that this rescue would take place at the end of the three

months. So we made up our minds to be ready and take a hand in it.



In the present and also in later sittings Joan was urged to name the

exact day of her deliverance; but she could not do that. She had not the

permission of her Voices. Moreover, the Voices themselves did not name

the precise day. Ever since the fulfilment of the prophecy, I have

believed that Joan had the idea that her deliverance was going to dome in

the form of death. But not that death! Divine as she was, dauntless as

she was in battle, she was human also. She was not solely a saint, an

angel, she was a clay-made girl also--as human a girl as any in the

world, and full of a human girl's sensitiveness and tenderness and

delicacies. And so, that death! No, she could not have lived the three

months with that one before her, I think. You remember that the first

time she was wounded she was frightened, and cried, just as any other

girl of seventeen would have done, although she had known for eighteen

days that she was going to be wounded on that very day. No, she was not

afraid of any ordinary death, and an ordinary death was what she believed

the prophecy of deliverance meant, I think, for her face showed

happiness, not horror, when she uttered it.



Now I will explain why I think as I do. Five weeks before she was

captured in the battle of Compiegne, her Voices told her what was coming.

They did not tell her the day or the place, but said she would be taken

prisoner and that it would be before the feast of St. John. She begged

that death, certain and swift, should be her fate, and the captivity

brief; for she was a free spirit, and dreaded the confinement. The Voices

made no promise, but only told her to bear whatever came. Now as they did

not refuse the swift death, a hopeful young thing like Joan would

naturally cherish that fact and make the most of it, allowing it to grow

and establish itself in her mind. And so now that she was told she was to

be "delivered" in three months, I think she believed it meant that she

would die in her bed in the prison, and that that was why she looked

happy and content--the gates of Paradise standing open for her, the time

so short, you see, her troubles so soon to be over, her reward so close

at hand. Yes, that would make her look happy, that would make her patient

and bold, and able to fight her fight out like a soldier. Save herself if

she could, of course, and try for the best, for that was the way she was

made; but die with her face to the front if die she must.



Then later, when she charged Cauchon with trying to kill her with a

poisoned fish, her notion that she was to be "delivered" by death in the

prison--if she had it, and I believe she had--would naturally be greatly

strengthened, you see.



But I am wandering from the trial. Joan was asked to definitely name the

time that she would be delivered from prison.



"I have always said that I was not permitted to tell you everything. I am

to be set free, and I desire to ask leave of my Voices to tell you the

day. That is why I wish for delay."



"Do your Voices forbid you to tell the truth?"



"Is it that you wish to know matters concerning the King of France? I

tell you again that he will regain his kingdom, and that I know it as

well as I know that you sit here before me in this tribunal." She sighed

and, after a little pause, added: "I should be dead but for this

revelation, which comforts me always."



Some trivial questions were asked her about St. Michael's dress and

appearance. She answered them with dignity, but one saw that they gave

her pain. After a little she said:



"I have great joy in seeing him, for when I see him I have the feeling

that I am not in mortal sin."



She added, "Sometimes St. Marguerite and St. Catherine have allowed me to

confess myself to them."



Here was a possible chance to set a successful snare for her innocence.



"When you confessed were you in mortal sin, do you think?"



But her reply did her no hurt. So the inquiry was shifted once more to

the revelations made to the King--secrets which the court had tried again

and again to force out of Joan, but without success.



"Now as to the sign given to the King--"



"I have already told you that I will tell you nothing about it."



"Do you know what the sign was?"



"As to that, you will not find out from me."



All this refers to Joan's secret interview with the King--held apart,

though two or three others were present. It was known--through Loyseleur,

of course--that this sign was a crown and was a pledge of the verity of

Joan's mission. But that is all a mystery until this day--the nature of

the crown, I mean--and will remain a mystery to the end of time. We can

never know whether a real crown descended upon the King's head, or only a

symbol, the mystic fabric of a vision.



"Did you see a crown upon the King's head when he received the

revelation?"



"I cannot tell you as to that, without perjury."



"Did the King have that crown at Rheims?"



"I think the King put upon his head a crown which he found there; but a

much richer one was brought him afterward."



"Have you seen that one?"



"I cannot tell you, without perjury. But whether I have seen it or not, I

have heard say that it was rich and magnificent."



They went on and pestered her to weariness about that mysterious crown,

but they got nothing more out of her. The sitting closed. A long, hard

day for all of us.







  10 The Inquisitors at Their Wits' End



THE COURT rested a day, then took up work again on Saturday, the third of

March.



This was one of our stormiest sessions. The whole court was out of

patience; and with good reason. These threescore distinguished churchmen,

illustrious tacticians, veteran legal gladiators, had left important

posts where their supervision was needed, to journey hither from various

regions and accomplish a most simple and easy matter--condemn and send to

death a country-lass of nineteen who could neither read nor write, knew

nothing of the wiles and perplexities of legal procedure, could not call

a single witness in her defense, was allowed no advocate or adviser, and

must conduct her case by herself against a hostile judge and a packed

jury. In two hours she would be hopelessly entangled, routed, defeated,

convicted. Nothing could be more certain that this--so they thought. But

it was a mistake. The two hours had strung out into days; what promised

to be a skirmish had expanded into a siege; the thing which had looked so

easy had proven to be surprisingly difficult; the light victim who was to

have been puffed away like a feather remained planted like a rock; and on

top of all this, if anybody had a right to laugh it was the country-lass

and not the court.



She was not doing that, for that was not her spirit; but others were

doing it. The whole town was laughing in its sleeve, and the court knew

it, and its dignity was deeply hurt. The members could not hide their

annoyance.



And so, as I have said, the session was stormy. It was easy to see that

these men had made up their minds to force words from Joan to-day which

should shorten up her case and bring it to a prompt conclusion. It shows

that after all their experience with her they did not know her yet.



They went into the battle with energy. They did not leave the questioning

to a particular member; no, everybody helped. They volleyed questions at

Joan from all over the house, and sometimes so many were talking at once

that she had to ask them to deliver their fire one at a time and not by

platoons. The beginning was as usual:



"You are once more required to take the oath pure and simple."



"I will answer to what is in the proces verbal. When I do more, I will

choose the occasion for myself."



That old ground was debated and fought over inch by inch with great

bitterness and many threats. But Joan remained steadfast, and the

questionings had to shift to other matters. Half an hour was spent over

Joan's apparitions--their dress, hair, general appearance, and so on--in

the hope of fishing something of a damaging sort out of the replies; but

with no result.



Next, the male attire was reverted to, of course. After many well-worn

questions had been re-asked, one or two new ones were put forward.



"Did not the King or the Queen sometimes ask you to quit the male dress?"



"That is not in your proces."



"Do you think you would have sinned if you had taken the dress of your

sex?"



"I have done best to serve and obey my sovereign Lord and Master."



After a while the matter of Joan's Standard was taken up, in the hope of

connecting magic and witchcraft with it.



"Did not your men copy your banner in their pennons?"



"The lancers of my guard did it. It was to distinguish them from the rest

of the forces. It was their own idea."



"Were they often renewed?"



"Yes. When the lances were broken they were renewed."



The purpose of the question unveils itself in the next one.



"Did you not say to your men that pennons made like your banner would be

lucky?"



The soldier-spirit in Joan was offended at this puerility. She drew

herself up, and said with dignity and fire: "What I said to them was,

'Ride those English down!' and I did it myself."



Whenever she flung out a scornful speech like that at these French

menials in English livery it lashed them into a rage; and that is what

happened this time. There were ten, twenty, sometimes even thirty of them

on their feet at a time, storming at the prisoner minute after minute,

but Joan was not disturbed.



By and by there was peace, and the inquiry was resumed.



It was now sought to turn against Joan the thousand loving honors which

had been done her when she was raising France out of the dirt and shame

of a century of slavery and castigation.



"Did you not cause paintings and images of yourself to be made?"



"No. At Arras I saw a painting of myself kneeling in armor before the

King and delivering him a letter; but I caused no such things to be

made."



"Were not masses and prayers said in your honor?"



"If it was done it was not by my command. But if any prayed for me I

think it was no harm."



"Did the French people believe you were sent of God?"



"As to that, I know not; but whether they believed it or not, I was not

the less sent of God."



"If they thought you were sent of God, do you think it was well thought?"



"If they believed it, their trust was not abused."



"What impulse was it, think you, that moved the people to kiss your

hands, your feet, and your vestments?"



"They were glad to see me, and so they did those things; and I could not

have prevented them if I had had the heart. Those poor people came

lovingly to me because I had not done them any hurt, but had done the

best I could for them according to my strength."



See what modest little words she uses to describe that touching

spectacle, her marches about France walled in on both sides by the

adoring multitudes: "They were glad to see me." Glad?



Why they were transported with joy to see her. When they could not kiss

her hands or her feet, they knelt in the mire and kissed the hoof-prints

of her horse. They worshiped her; and that is what these priests were

trying to prove. It was nothing to them that she was not to blame for

what other people did. No, if she was worshiped, it was enough; she was

guilty of mortal sin.



Curious logic, one must say.



"Did you not stand sponsor for some children baptized at Rheims?"



"At Troyes I did, and at St. Denis; and I named the boys Charles, in

honor of the King, and the girls I named Joan."



"Did not women touch their rings to those which you wore?"



"Yes, many did, but I did not know their reason for it."



"At Rheims was your Standard carried into the church? Did you stand at

the altar with it in your hand at the Coronation?"



"Yes."



"In passing through the country did you confess yourself in the Churches

and receive the sacrament?"



"Yes."



"In the dress of a man?"



"Yes. But I do not remember that I was in armor."



It was almost a concession! almost a half-surrender of the permission

granted her by the Church at Poitiers to dress as a man. The wily court

shifted to another matter: to pursue this one at this time might call

Joan's attention to her small mistake, and by her native cleverness she

might recover her lost ground. The tempestuous session had worn her and

drowsed her alertness.



"It is reported that you brought a dead child to life in the church at

Lagny. Was that in answer to your prayers?"



"As to that, I have no knowledge. Other young girls were praying for the

child, and I joined them and prayed also, doing no more than they."



"Continue."



"While we prayed it came to life, and cried. It had been dead three days,

and was as black as my doublet. It was straight way baptized, then it

passed from life again and was buried in holy ground."



"Why did you jump from the tower of Beaurevoir by night and try to

escape?"



"I would go to the succor of Compiegne."



It was insinuated that this was an attempt to commit the deep crime of

suicide to avoid falling into the hands of the English.



"Did you not say that you would rather die than be delivered into the

power of the English?"



Joan answered frankly; without perceiving the trap:



"Yes; my words were, that I would rather that my soul be returned unto

God than that I should fall into the hands of the English."



It was now insinuated that when she came to, after jumping from the

tower, she was angry and blasphemed the name of God; and that she did it

again when she heard of the defection of the Commandant of Soissons. She

was hurt and indignant at this, and said:



"It is not true. I have never cursed. It is not my custom to swear."







  11 The Court Reorganized for Assassination



A HALT was called. It was time. Cauchon was losing ground in the fight,

Joan was gaining it.



There were signs that here and there in the court a judge was being

softened toward Joan by her courage, her presence of mind, her fortitude,

her constancy, her piety, her simplicity and candor, her manifest purity,

the nobility of her character, her fine intelligence, and the good brave

fight she was making, all friendless and alone, against unfair odds, and

there was grave room for fear that this softening process would spread

further and presently bring Cauchon's plans in danger.



Something must be done, and it was done. Cauchon was not distinguished

for compassion, but he now gave proof that he had it in his character. He

thought it pity to subject so many judges to the prostrating fatigues of

this trial when it could be conducted plenty well enough by a handful of

them. Oh, gentle judge! But he did not remember to modify the fatigues

for the little captive.



He would let all the judges but a handful go, but he would select the

handful himself, and he did.



He chose tigers. If a lamb or two got in, it was by oversight, not

intention; and he knew what to do with lambs when discovered.



He called a small council now, and during five days they sifted the huge

bulk of answers thus far gathered from Joan. They winnowed it of all

chaff, all useless matter--that is, all matter favorable to Joan; they

saved up all matter which could be twisted to her hurt, and out of this

they constructed a basis for a new trial which should have the semblance

of a continuation of the old one. Another change. It was plain that the

public trial had wrought damage: its proceedings had been discussed all

over the town and had moved many to pity the abused prisoner. There

should be no more of that. The sittings should be secret hereafter, and

no spectators admitted. So Noel could come no more. I sent this news to

him. I had not the heart to carry it myself. I would give the pain a

chance to modify before I should see him in the evening.



On the 10th of March the secret trial began. A week had passed since I

had seen Joan. Her appearance gave me a great shock. She looked tired and

weak. She was listless and far away, and her answers showed that she was

dazed and not able to keep perfect run of all that was done and said.

Another court would not have taken advantage of her state, seeing that

her life was at stake here, but would have adjourned and spared her. Did

this one? No; it worried her for hours, and with a glad and eager

ferocity, making all it could out of this great chance, the first one it

had had.



She was tortured into confusing herself concerning the "sign" which had

been given the King, and the next day this was continued hour after hour.

As a result, she made partial revealments of particulars forbidden by her

Voices; and seemed to me to state as facts things which were but

allegories and visions mixed with facts.



The third day she was brighter, and looked less worn. She was almost her

normal self again, and did her work well. Many attempts were made to

beguile her into saying indiscreet things, but she saw the purpose in

view and answered with tact and wisdom.



"Do you know if St. Catherine and St. Marguerite hate the English?"



"They love whom Our Lord loves, and hate whom He hates."



"Does God hate the English?"



"Of the love or the hatred of God toward the English I know nothing."

Then she spoke up with the old martial ring in her voice and the old

audacity in her words, and added, "But I know this--that God will send

victory to the French, and that all the English will be flung out of

France but the dead ones!"



"Was God on the side of the English when they were prosperous in France?"



"I do not know if God hates the French, but I think that He allowed them

to be chastised for their sins."



It was a sufficiently naive way to account for a chastisement which had

now strung out for ninety-six years. But nobody found fault with it.

There was nobody there who would not punish a sinner ninety-six years if

he could, nor anybody there who would ever dream of such a thing as the

Lord's being any shade less stringent than men.



"Have you ever embraced St. Marguerite and St. Catherine?"



"Yes, both of them."



The evil face of Cauchon betrayed satisfaction when she said that.



"When you hung garlands upon L'Arbre Fee Bourlemont, did you do it in

honor of your apparitions?"



"No."



Satisfaction again. No doubt Cauchon would take it for granted that she

hung them there out of sinful love for the fairies.



"When the saints appeared to you did you bow, did you make reverence, did

you kneel?"



"Yes; I did them the most honor and reverence that I could."



A good point for Cauchon if he could eventually make it appear that these

were no saints to whom she had done reverence, but devils in disguise.



Now there was the matter of Joan's keeping her supernatural commerce a

secret from her parents. Much might be made of that. In fact, particular

emphasis had been given to it in a private remark written in the margin

of the proces: "She concealed her visions from her parents and from every

one." Possibly this disloyalty to her parents might itself be the sign of

the satanic source of her mission.



"Do you think it was right to go away to the wars without getting your

parents' leave? It is written one must honor his father and his mother."



"I have obeyed them in all things but that. And for that I have begged

their forgiveness in a letter and gotten it."



"Ah, you asked their pardon? So you knew you were guilty of sin in going

without their leave!"



Joan was stirred. Her eyes flashed, and she exclaimed:



"I was commanded of God, and it was right to go! If I had had a hundred

fathers and mothers and been a king's daughter to boot I would have

gone."



"Did you never ask your Voices if you might tell your parents?"



"They were willing that I should tell them, but I would not for anything

have given my parents that pain."



To the minds of the questioners this headstrong conduct savored of pride.

That sort of pride would move one to see sacrilegious adorations.



"Did not your Voices call you Daughter of God?"



Joan answered with simplicity, and unsuspiciously:



"Yes; before the siege of Orleans and since, they have several times

called me Daughter of God."



Further indications of pride and vanity were sought.



"What horse were you riding when you were captured? Who gave it you?"



"The King."



"You had other things--riches--of the King?"



"For myself I had horses and arms, and money to pay the service in my

household."



"Had you not a treasury?"



"Yes. Ten or twelve thousand crowns." Then she said with naivete "It was

not a great sum to carry on a war with."



"You have it yet?"



"No. It is the King's money. My brothers hold it for him."



"What were the arms which you left as an offering in the church of St.

Denis?"



"My suit of silver mail and a sword."



"Did you put them there in order that they might be adored?"



"No. It was but an act of devotion. And it is the custom of men of war

who have been wounded to make such offering there. I had been wounded

before Paris."



Nothing appealed to these stony hearts, those dull imaginations--not even

this pretty picture, so simply drawn, of the wounded girl-soldier hanging

her toy harness there in curious companionship with the grim and dusty

iron mail of the historic defenders of France. No, there was nothing in

it for them; nothing, unless evil and injury for that innocent creature

could be gotten out of it somehow.



"Which aided most--you the Standard, or the Standard you?"



"Whether it was the Standard or whether it was I, is nothing--the

victories came from God."



"But did you base your hopes of victory in yourself or in your Standard?"



"In neither. In God, and not otherwise."



"Was not your Standard waved around the King's head at the Coronation?"



"No. It was not."



"Why was it that your Standard had place at the crowning of the King in

the Cathedral of Rheims, rather than those of the other captains?"



Then, soft and low, came that touching speech which will live as long as

language lives, and pass into all tongues, and move all gentle hearts

wheresoever it shall come, down to the latest day:



"It had borne the burden, it had earned the honor." [1] How simple it is,

and how beautiful. And how it beggars the studies eloquence of the

masters of oratory. Eloquence was a native gift of Joan of Arc; it came

from her lips without effort and without preparation. Her words were as

sublime as her deeds, as sublime as her character; they had their source

in a great heart and were coined in a great brain.



[1] What she said has been many times translated, but never with success.

There is a haunting pathos about the original which eludes all efforts to

convey it into our tongue. It is as subtle as an odor, and escapes in the

transmission. Her words were these:



"Il avait ,t, a la peine, c'etait bien raison qu'il fut a l'honneur."



Monseigneur Ricard, Honorary Vicar-General to the Archbishop of Aix,

finely speaks of it (Jeanne d'Arc la Venerable, page 197) as "that

sublime reply, enduring in the history of celebrated sayings like the cry

of a French and Christian soul wounded unto death in its patriotism and

its faith." -- TRANSLATOR.







  12 Joan's Master-Stroke Diverted



NOW, as a next move, this small secret court of holy assassins did a

thing so base that even at this day, in my old age, it is hard to speak

of it with patience.



In the beginning of her commerce with her Voices there at Domremy, the

child Joan solemnly devoted her life to God, vowing her pure body and her

pure soul to His service. You will remember that her parents tried to

stop her from going to the wars by haling her to the court at Toul to

compel her to make a marriage which she had never promised to make--a

marriage with our poor, good, windy, big, hard-fighting, and most dear

and lamented comrade, the Standard-Bearer, who fell in honorable battle

and sleeps with God these sixty years, peace to his ashes! And you will

remember how Joan, sixteen years old, stood up in that venerable court

and conducted her case all by herself, and tore the poor Paladin's case

to rags and blew it away with a breath; and how the astonished old judge

on the bench spoke of her as "this marvelous child."



You remember all that. Then think what I felt, to see these false

priests, here in the tribunal wherein Joan had fought a fourth lone fight

in three years, deliberately twist that matter entirely around and try to

make out that Joan haled the Paladin into court and pretended that he had

promised to marry her, and was bent on making him do it.



Certainly there was no baseness that those people were ashamed to stoop

to in their hunt for that friendless girl's life. What they wanted to

show was this--that she had committed the sin of relapsing from her vow

and trying to violate it.



Joan detailed the true history of the case, but lost her temper as she

went along, and finished with some words for Cauchon which he remembers

yet, whether he is fanning himself in the world he belongs in or has

swindled his way into the other.



The rest of this day and part of the next the court labored upon the old

theme--the male attire. It was shabby work for those grave men to be

engaged in; for they well knew one of Joan's reasons for clinging to the

male dress was, that soldiers of the guard were always present in her

room whether she was asleep or awake, and that the male dress was a

better protection for her modesty than the other.



The court knew that one of Joan's purposes had been the deliverance of

the exiled Duke of Orleans, and they were curious to know how she had

intended to manage it. Her plan was characteristically businesslike, and

her statement of it as characteristically simple and straightforward:



"I would have taken English prisoners enough in France for his ransom;

and failing that, I would have invaded England and brought him out by

force."



That was just her way. If a thing was to be done, it was love first, and

hammer and tongs to follow; but no shilly-shallying between. She added

with a little sigh:



"If I had had my freedom three years, I would have delivered him."



"Have you the permission of your Voices to break out of prison whenever

you can?"



"I have asked their leave several times, but they have not given it."



I think it is as I have said, she expected the deliverance of death, and

within the prison walls, before the three months should expire.



"Would you escape if you saw the doors open?"



She spoke up frankly and said:



"Yes--for I should see in that the permission of Our Lord. God helps who

help themselves, the proverb says. But except I thought I had permission,

I would not go."



Now, then, at this point, something occurred which convinces me, every

time I think of it--and it struck me so at the time--that for a moment,

at least, her hopes wandered to the King, and put into her mind the same

notion about her deliverance which Noel and I had settled upon--a rescue

by her old soldiers. I think the idea of the rescue did occur to her, but

only as a passing thought, and that it quickly passed away.



Some remark of the Bishop of Beauvais moved her to remind him once more

that he was an unfair judge, and had no right to preside there, and that

he was putting himself in great danger.



"What danger?" he asked.



"I do not know. St. Catherine has promised me help, but I do not know the

form of it. I do not know whether I am to be delivered from this prison

or whether when you sent me to the scaffold there will happen a trouble

by which I shall be set free. Without much thought as to this matter, I

am of the opinion that it may be one or the other." After a pause she

added these words, memorable forever--words whose meaning she may have

miscaught, misunderstood; as to that we can never know; words which she

may have rightly understood, as to that, also, we can never know; but

words whose mystery fell away from them many a year ago and revealed

their meaning to all the world:



"But what my Voices have said clearest is, that I shall be delivered by a

great victory." She paused, my heart was beating fast, for to me that

great victory meant the sudden bursting in of our old soldiers with the

war-cry and clash of steel at the last moment and the carrying off of

Joan of Arc in triumph. But, oh, that thought had such a short life! For

now she raised her head and finished, with those solemn words which men

still so often quote and dwell upon--words which filled me with fear,

they sounded so like a prediction. "And always they say 'Submit to

whatever comes; do not grieve for your martyrdom; from it you will ascend

into the Kingdom of Paradise."



Was she thinking of fire and the stake? I think not. I thought of it

myself, but I believe she was only thinking of this slow and cruel

martyrdom of chains and captivity and insult. Surely, martyrdom was the

right name for it.



It was Jean de la Fontaine who was asking the questions. He was willing

to make the most he could out of what she had said:



"As the Voices have told you you are going to Paradise, you feel certain

that that will happen and that you will not be damned in hell. Is that

so?"



"I believe what they told me. I know that I shall be saved."



"It is a weighty answer."



"To me the knowledge that I shall be saved is a great treasure."



"Do you think that after that revelation you could be able to commit

mortal sin?"



"As to that, I do not know. My hope for salvation is in holding fast to

my oath to keep by body and my soul pure."



"Since you know you are to be saved, do you think it necessary to go to

confession?"



The snare was ingeniously devised, but Joan's simple and humble answer

left it empty:



"One cannot keep his conscience too clean."



We were now arriving at the last day of this new trial. Joan had come

through the ordeal well. It had been a long and wearisome struggle for

all concerned. All ways had been tried to convict the accused, and all

had failed, thus far. The inquisitors were thoroughly vexed and

dissatisfied.



However, they resolved to make one more effort, put in one more day's

work. This was done--March 17th. Early in the sitting a notable trap was

set for Joan:



"Will you submit to the determination of the Church all your words and

deeds, whether good or bad?"



That was well planned. Joan was in imminent peril now. If she should

heedlessly say yes, it would put her mission itself upon trial, and one

would know how to decide its source and character promptly. If she should

say no, she would render herself chargeable with the crime of heresy.



But she was equal to the occasion. She drew a distinct line of separation

between the Church's authority over her as a subject member, and the

matter of her mission. She said she loved the Church and was ready to

support the Christian faith with all her strength; but as to the works

done under her mission, those must be judged by God alone, who had

commanded them to be done.



The judge still insisted that she submit them to the decision of the

Church. She said:



"I will submit them to Our Lord who sent me. It would seem to me that He

and His Church are one, and that there should be no difficulty about this

matter." Then she turned upon the judge and said, "Why do you make a

difficulty when there is no room for any?"



Then Jean de la Fontaine corrected her notion that there was but one

Church. There were two--the Church Triumphant, which is God, the saints,

the angels, and the redeemed, and has its seat in heave; and the Church

Militant, which is our Holy Father the Pope, Vicar of God, the prelates,

the clergy and all good Christians and Catholics, the which Church has

its seat in the earth, is governed by the Holy Spirit, and cannot err.

"Will you not submit those matters to the Church Militant?"



"I am come to the King of France from the Church Triumphant on high by

its commandant, and to that Church I will submit all those things which I

have done. For the Church Militant I have no other answer now."



The court took note of this straitly worded refusal, and would hope to

get profit out of it; but the matter was dropped for the present, and a

long chase was then made over the old hunting-ground--the fairies, the

visions, the male attire, and all that.



In the afternoon the satanic Bishop himself took the chair and presided

over the closing scenes of the trial. Along toward the finish, this

question was asked by one of the judges:



"You have said to my lord the Bishop that you would answer him as you

would answer before our Holy Father the Pope, and yet there are several

questions which you continually refuse to answer. Would you not answer

the Pope more fully than you have answered before my lord of Beauvais?

Would you not feel obliged to answer the Pope, who is the Vicar of God,

more fully?"



Now a thunder-clap fell out of a clear sky:



"Take me to the Pope. I will answer to everything that I ought to."



It made the Bishop's purple face fairly blanch with consternation. If

Joan had only known, if she had only know! She had lodged a mine under

this black conspiracy able to blow the Bishop's schemes to the four winds

of heaven, and she didn't know it. She had made that speech by mere

instinct, not suspecting what tremendous forces were hidden in it, and

there was none to tell her what she had done. I knew, and Manchon knew;

and if she had known how to read writing we could have hoped to get the

knowledge to her somehow; but speech was the only way, and none was

allowed to approach her near enough for that. So there she sat, once more

Joan of Arc the Victorious, but all unconscious of it. She was miserably

worn and tired, by the long day's struggle and by illness, or she must

have noticed the effect of that speech and divined the reason of it.



She had made many master-strokes, but this was the master-stroke. It was

an appeal to Rome. It was her clear right; and if she had persisted in it

Cauchon's plot would have tumbled about his ears like a house of cards,

and he would have gone from that place the worst-beaten man of the

century. He was daring, but he was not daring enough to stand up against

that demand if Joan had urged it. But no, she was ignorant, poor thing,

and did not know what a blow she had struck for life and liberty.



France was not the Church. Rome had no interest in the destruction of

this messenger of God.



Rome would have given her a fair trial, and that was all that her cause

needed. From that trial she would have gone forth free, and honored, and

blessed.



But it was not so fated. Cauchon at once diverted the questions to other

matters and hurried the trial quickly to an end.



As Joan moved feebly away, dragging her chains, I felt stunned and dazed,

and kept saying to myself, "Such a little while ago she said the saving

word and could have gone free; and now, there she goes to her death; yes,

it is to her death, I know it, I feel it. They will double the guards;

they will never let any come near her now between this and her

condemnation, lest she get a hint and speak that word again. This is the

bitterest day that has come to me in all this miserable time."







  13 The Third Trial Fails



SO THE SECOND trial in the prison was over. Over, and no definite result.

The character of it I have described to you. It was baser in one

particular than the previous one; for this time the charges had not been

communicated to Joan, therefore she had been obliged to fight in the

dark.



There was no opportunity to do any thinking beforehand; there was no

foreseeing what traps might be set, and no way to prepare for them. Truly

it was a shabby advantage to take of a girl situated as this one was. One

day, during the course of it, an able lawyer of Normandy, Maetre Lohier,

happened to be in Rouen, and I will give you his opinion of that trial,

so that you may see that I have been honest with you, and that my

partisanship has not made me deceive you as to its unfair and illegal

character. Cauchon showed Lohier the proces and asked his opinion about

the trial. Now this was the opinion which he gave to Cauchon. He said

that the whole thing was null and void; for these reasons: 1, because the

trial was secret, and full freedom of speech and action on the part of

those present not possible; 2, because the trial touched the honor of the

King of France, yet he was not summoned to defend himself, nor any one

appointed to represent him; 3, because the charges against the prisoner

were not communicated to her; 4, because the accused, although young and

simple, had been forced to defend her cause without help of counsel,

notwithstanding she had so much at stake.



Did that please Bishop Cauchon? It did not. He burst out upon Lohier with

the most savage cursings, and swore he would have him drowned. Lohier

escaped from Rouen and got out of France with all speed, and so saved his

life.



Well, as I have said, the second trial was over, without definite result.

But Cauchon did not give up. He could trump up another. And still another

and another, if necessary. He had the half-promise of an enormous

prize--the Archbishopric of Rouen--if he should succeed in burning the

body and damning to hell the soul of this young girl who had never done

him any harm; and such a prize as that, to a man like the Bishop of

Beauvais, was worth the burning and damning of fifty harmless girls, let

alone one.



So he set to work again straight off next day; and with high confidence,

too, intimating with brutal cheerfulness that he should succeed this

time. It took him and the other scavengers nine days to dig matter enough

out of Joan's testimony and their own inventions to build up the new mass

of charges. And it was a formidable mass indeed, for it numbered

sixty-six articles.



This huge document was carried to the castle the next day, March 27th;

and there, before a dozen carefully selected judges, the new trial was

begun.



Opinions were taken, and the tribunal decided that Joan should hear the

articles read this time.



Maybe that was on account of Lohier's remark upon that head; or maybe it

was hoped that the reading would kill the prisoner with fatigue--for, as

it turned out, this reading occupied several days. It was also decided

that Joan should be required to answer squarely to every article, and

that if she refused she should be considered convicted. You see, Cauchon

was managing to narrow her chances more and more all the time; he was

drawing the toils closer and closer.



Joan was brought in, and the Bishop of Beauvais opened with a speech to

her which ought to have made even himself blush, so laden it was with

hypocrisy and lies. He said that this court was composed of holy and

pious churchmen whose hearts were full of benevolence and compassion

toward her, and that they had no wish to hurt her body, but only a desire

to instruct her and lead her into the way of truth and salvation.



Why, this man was born a devil; now think of his describing himself and

those hardened slaves of his in such language as that.



And yet, worse was to come. For now having in mind another of Lovier's

hints, he had the cold effrontery to make to Joan a proposition which, I

think, will surprise you when you hear it. He said that this court,

recognizing her untaught estate and her inability to deal with the

complex and difficult matters which were about to be considered, had

determined, out of their pity and their mercifulness, to allow her to

choose one or more persons out of their own number to help her with

counsel and advice!



Think of that--a court made up of Loyseleur and his breed of reptiles. It

was granting leave to a lamb to ask help of a wolf. Joan looked up to see

if he was serious, and perceiving that he was at least pretending to be,

she declined, of course.



The Bishop was not expecting any other reply. He had made a show of

fairness and could have it entered on the minutes, therefore he was

satisfied.



Then he commanded Joan to answer straitly to every accusation; and

threatened to cut her off from the Church if she failed to do that or

delayed her answers beyond a given length of time.



Yes, he was narrowing her chances down, step by step.



Thomas de Courcelles began the reading of that interminable document,

article by article. Joan answered to each article in its turn; sometimes

merely denying its truth, sometimes by saying her answer would be found

in the records of the previous trials.



What a strange document that was, and what an exhibition and exposure of

the heart of man, the one creature authorized to boast that he is made in

the image of God. To know Joan of Arc was to know one who was wholly

noble, pure, truthful, brave, compassionate, generous, pious, unselfish,

modest, blameless as the very flowers in the fields--a nature fine and

beautiful, a character supremely great. To know her from that document

would be to know her as the exact reverse of all that. Nothing that she

was appears in it, everything that she was not appears there in detail.



Consider some of the things it charges against her, and remember who it

is it is speaking of. It calls her a sorceress, a false prophet, an

invoker and companion of evil spirits, a dealer in magic, a person

ignorant of the Catholic faith, a schismatic; she is sacrilegious, an

idolater, an apostate, a blasphemer of God and His saints, scandalous,

seditious, a disturber of the peace; she incites men to war, and to the

spilling of human blood; she discards the decencies and proprieties of

her sex, irreverently assuming the dress of a man and the vocation of a

soldier; she beguiles both princes and people; she usurps divine honors,

and has caused herself to be adored and venerated, offering her hands and

her vestments to be kissed.



There it is--every fact of her life distorted, perverted, reversed. As a

child she had loved the fairies, she had spoken a pitying word for them

when they were banished from their home, she had played under their tree

and around their fountain--hence she was a comrade of evil spirits.



She had lifted France out of the mud and moved her to strike for freedom,

and led her to victory after victory--hence she was a disturber of the

peace--as indeed she was, and a provoker of war--as indeed she was again!

and France will be proud of it and grateful for it for many a century to

come. And she had been adored--as if she could help that, poor thing, or

was in any way to blame for it. The cowed veteran and the wavering

recruit had drunk the spirit of war from her eyes and touched her sword

with theirs and moved forward invincible--hence she was a sorceress.



And so the document went on, detail by detail, turning these waters of

life to poison, this gold to dross, these proofs of a noble and beautiful

life to evidences of a foul and odious one.



Of course, the sixty-six articles were just a rehash of the things which

had come up in the course of the previous trials, so I will touch upon

this new trial but lightly. In fact, Joan went but little into detail

herself, usually merely saying, "That is not true--passez outre"; or, "I

have answered that before--let the clerk read it in his record," or

saying some other brief thing.



She refused to have her mission examined and tried by the earthly Church.

The refusal was taken note of.



She denied the accusation of idolatry and that she had sought men's

homage. She said:



"If any kissed my hands and my vestments it was not by my desire, and I

did what I could to prevent it."



She had the pluck to say to that deadly tribunal that she did not know

the fairies to be evil beings. She knew it was a perilous thing to say,

but it was not in her nature to speak anything but the truth when she

spoke at all. Danger had no weight with her in such things. Note was

taken of her remark.



She refused, as always before, when asked if she would put off the male

attire if she were given permission to commune. And she added this:



"When one receives the sacrament, the manner of his dress is a small

thing and of no value in the eyes of Our Lord."



She was charge with being so stubborn in clinging to her male dress that

she would not lay it off even to get the blessed privilege of hearing

mass. She spoke out with spirit and said:



"I would rather die than be untrue to my oath to God."



She was reproached with doing man's work in the wars and thus deserting

the industries proper to her sex. She answered, with some little touch of

soldierly disdain:



"As to the matter of women's work, there's plenty to do it."



It was always a comfort to me to see the soldier spirit crop up in her.

While that remained in her she would be Joan of Arc, and able to look

trouble and fate in the face.



"It appears that this mission of yours which you claim you had from God,

was to make war and pour out human blood."



Joan replied quite simply, contenting herself with explaining that war

was not her first move, but her second:



"To begin with, I demanded that peace should be made. If it was refused,

then I would fight."



The judge mixed the Burgundians and English together in speaking of the

enemy which Joan had come to make war upon. But she showed that she made

a distinction between them by act and word, the Burgundians being

Frenchmen and therefore entitled to less brusque treatment than the

English. She said:



"As to the Duke of Burgundy, I required of him, both by letters and by

his ambassadors, that he make peace with the King. As to the English, the

only peace for them was that they leave the country and go home."



Then she said that even with the English she had shown a pacific

disposition, since she had warned them away by proclamation before

attacking them.



"If they had listened to me," said she, "they would have done wisely." At

this point she uttered her prophecy again, saying with emphasis, "Before

seven years they will see it themselves."



Then they presently began to pester her again about her male costume, and

tried to persuade her to voluntarily promise to discard it. I was never

deep, so I think it no wonder that I was puzzled by their persistency in

what seemed a thing of no consequence, and could not make out what their

reason could be. But we all know now. We all know now that it was another

of their treacherous projects. Yes, if they could but succeed in getting

her to formally discard it they could play a game upon her which would

quickly destroy her. So they kept at their evil work until at last she

broke out and said:



"Peace! Without the permission of God I will not lay it off though you

cut off my head!"



At one point she corrected the proces verbal, saying:



"It makes me say that everything which I have done was done by the

counsel of Our Lord. I did not say that, I said 'all which I have well

done.'"



Doubt was cast upon the authenticity of her mission because of the

ignorance and simplicity of the messenger chosen. Joan smiled at that.

She could have reminded these people that Our Lord, who is no respecter

of persons, had chosen the lowly for his high purposes even oftener than

he had chosen bishops and cardinals; but she phrased her rebuke in

simpler terms:



"It is the prerogative of Our Lord to choose His instruments where He

will."



She was asked what form of prayer she used in invoking counsel from on

high. She said the form was brief and simple; then she lifted her pallid

face and repeated it, clasping her chained hands:



"Most dear God, in honor of your holy passion I beseech you, if you love

me, that you will reveal to me what I am to answer to these churchmen. As

concerns my dress, I know by what command I have put it on, but I know

not in what manner I am to lay it off. I pray you tell me what to do."



She was charged with having dared, against the precepts of God and His

saints, to assume empire over men and make herself Commander-in-Chief.

That touched the soldier in her. She had a deep reverence for priests,

but the soldier in her had but small reverence for a priest's opinions

about war; so, in her answer to this charge she did not condescend to go

into any explanations or excuses, but delivered herself with bland

indifference and military brevity.



"If I was Commander-in-Chief, it was to thrash the English."



Death was staring her in the face here all the time, but no matter; she

dearly loved to make these English-hearted Frenchmen squirm, and whenever

they gave her an opening she was prompt to jab her sting into it. She got

great refreshment out of these little episodes. Her days were a desert;

these were the oases in it.



Her being in the wars with men was charged against her as an indelicacy.

She said:



"I had a woman with me when I could--in towns and lodgings. In the field

I always slept in my armor."



That she and her family had been ennobled by the King was charged against

her as evidence that the source of her deeds were sordid self-seeking.

She answered that she had not asked this grace of the King; it was his

own act.



This third trial was ended at last. And once again there was no definite

result.



Possibly a fourth trial might succeed in defeating this apparently

unconquerable girl. So the malignant Bishop set himself to work to plan

it.



He appointed a commission to reduce the substance of the sixty-six

articles to twelve compact lies, as a basis for the new attempt. This was

done. It took several days.



Meantime Cauchon went to Joan's cell one day, with Manchon and two of the

judges, Isambard de la Pierre and Martin Ladvenue, to see if he could not

manage somehow to beguile Joan into submitting her mission to the

examination and decision of the Church Militant--that is to say, to that

part of the Church Militant which was represented by himself and his

creatures.



Joan once more positively refused. Isambard de la Pierre had a heart in

his body, and he so pitied this persecuted poor girl that he ventured to

do a very daring thing; for he asked her if she would be willing to have

her case go before the Council of Basel, and said it contained as many

priests of her party as of the English party.



Joan cried out that she would gladly go before so fairly constructed a

tribunal as that; but before Isambard could say another word Cauchon

turned savagely upon him and exclaimed:



"Shut up, in the devil's name!"



Then Manchon ventured to do a brave thing, too, though he did it in great

fear for his life. He asked Cauchon if he should enter Joan's submission

to the Council of Basel upon the minutes.



"No! It is not necessary."



"Ah," said poor Joan, reproachfully, "you set down everything that is

against me, but you will not set down what is for me."



It was piteous. It would have touched the heart of a brute. But Cauchon

was more than that.







  14 Joan Struggles with Her Twelve Lies



WE WERE now in the first days of April. Joan was ill. She had fallen ill

the 29th of March, the day after the close of the third trial, and was

growing worse when the scene which I have just described occurred in her

cell. It was just like Cauchon to go there and try to get some advantage

out of her weakened state.



Let us note some of the particulars in the new indictment--the Twelve

Lies.



Part of the first one says Joan asserts that she has found her salvation.

She never said anything of the kind. It also says she refuses to submit

herself to the Church. Not true. She was willing to submit all her acts

to this Rouen tribunal except those done by the command of God in

fulfilment of her mission. Those she reserved for the judgment of God.

She refused to recognize Cauchon and his serfs as the Church, but was

willing to go before the Pope or the Council of Basel.



A clause of another of the Twelve says she admits having threatened with

death those who would not obey her. Distinctly false. Another clause says

she declares that all she has done has been done by command of God. What

she really said was, all that she had done well--a correction made by

herself as you have already seen.



Another of the Twelve says she claims that she has never committed any

sin. She never made any such claim.



Another makes the wearing of the male dress a sin. If it was, she had

high Catholic authority for committing it--that of the Archbishop of

Rheims and the tribunal of Poitiers.



The Tenth Article was resentful against her for "pretending" that St.

Catherine and St.



Marguerite spoke French and not English, and were French in their

politics.



The Twelve were to be submitted first to the learned doctors of theology

of the University of Paris for approval. They were copied out and ready

by the night of April 4th. Then Manchon did another bold thing: he wrote

in the margin that many of the Twelve put statements in Joan's mouth

which were the exact opposite of what she had said. That fact would not

be considered important by the University of Paris, and would not

influence its decision or stir its humanity, in case it had any--which it

hadn't when acting in a political capacity, as at present--but it was a

brave thing for that good Manchon to do, all the same.



The Twelve were sent to Paris next day, April 5th. That afternoon there

was a great tumult in Rouen, and excited crowds were flocking through all

the chief streets, chattering and seeking for news; for a report had gone

abroad that Joan of Arc was sick until death. In truth, these long

seances had worn her out, and she was ill indeed. The heads of the

English party were in a state of consternation; for if Joan should die

uncondemned by the Church and go to the grave unsmirched, the pity and

the love of the people would turn her wrongs and sufferings and death

into a holy martyrdom, and she would be even a mightier power in France

dead than she had been when alive.



The Earl of Warwick and the English Cardinal (Winchester) hurried to the

castle and sent messengers flying for physicians. Warwick was a hard man,

a rude, coarse man, a man without compassion. There lay the sick girl

stretched in her chains in her iron cage--not an object to move man to

ungentle speech, one would think; yet Warwick spoke right out in her

hearing and said to the physicians:



"Mind you take good care of her. The King of England has no mind to have

her die a natural death. She is dear to him, for he bought her dear, and

he does not want her to die, save at the stake. Now then, mind you cure

her."



The doctors asked Joan what had made her ill. She said the Bishop of

Beauvais had sent her a fish and she thought it was that.



Then Jean d'Estivet burst out on her, and called her names and abused

her. He understood Joan to be charging the Bishop with poisoning her, you

see; and that was not pleasing to him, for he was one of Cauchon's most

loving and conscienceless slaves, and it outraged him to have Joan injure

his master in the eyes of these great English chiefs, these being men who

could ruin Cauchon and would promptly do it if they got the conviction

that he was capable of saving Joan from the stake by poisoning her and

thus cheating the English out of all the real value gainable by her

purchase from the Duke of Burgundy.



Joan had a high fever, and the doctors proposed to bleed her. Warwick

said:



"Be careful about that; she is smart and is capable of killing herself."



He meant that to escape the stake she might undo the bandage and let

herself bleed to death.



But the doctors bled her anyway, and then she was better.



Not for long, though. Jean d'Estivet could not hold still, he was so

worried and angry about the suspicion of poisoning which Joan had hinted

at; so he came back in the evening and stormed at her till he brought the

fever all back again.



When Warwick heard of this he was in a fine temper, you may be sure, for

here was his prey threatening to escape again, and all through the

over-zeal of this meddling fool. Warwick gave D'Estivet a quite admirable

cursing--admirable as to strength, I mean, for it was said by persons of

culture that the art of it was not good--and after that the meddler kept

still.



Joan remained ill more than two weeks; then she grew better. She was

still very weak, but she could bear a little persecution now without much

danger to her life. It seemed to Cauchon a good time to furnish it. So he

called together some of his doctors of theology and went to her dungeon.

Manchon and I went along to keep the record--that is, to set down what

might be useful to Cauchon, and leave out the rest.



The sight of Joan gave me a shock. Why, she was but a shadow! It was

difficult for me to realize that this frail little creature with the sad

face and drooping form was the same Joan of Arc that I had so often seen,

all fire and enthusiasm, charging through a hail of death and the

lightning and thunder of the guns at the head of her battalions. It wrung

my heart to see her looking like this.



But Cauchon was not touched. He made another of those conscienceless

speeches of his, all dripping with hypocrisy and guile. He told Joan that

among her answers had been some which had seemed to endanger religion;

and as she was ignorant and without knowledge of the Scriptures, he had

brought some good and wise men to instruct her, if she desired it. Said

he, "We are churchmen, and disposed by our good will as well as by our

vocation to procure for you the salvation of your soul and your body, in

every way in our power, just as we would do the like for our nearest kin

or for ourselves. In this we but follow the example of Holy Church, who

never closes the refuge of her bosom against any that are willing to

return."



Joan thanked him for these sayings and said:



"I seem to be in danger of death from this malady; if it be the pleasure

of God that I die here, I beg that I may be heard in confession and also

receive my Saviour; and that I may be buried in consecrated ground."



Cauchon thought he saw his opportunity at last; this weakened body had

the fear of an unblessed death before it and the pains of hell to follow.

This stubborn spirit would surrender now. So he spoke out and said:



"Then if you want the Sacraments, you must do as all good Catholics do,

and submit to the Church."



He was eager for her answer; but when it came there was no surrender in

it, she still stood to her guns. She turned her head away and said

wearily:



"I have nothing more to say."



Cauchon's temper was stirred, and he raised his voice threateningly and

said that the more she was in danger of death the more she ought to amend

her life; and again he refused the things she begged for unless she would

submit to the Church. Joan said:



"If I die in this prison I beg you to have me buried in holy ground; if

you will not, I cast myself upon my Saviour."



There was some more conversation of the like sort, then Cauchon demanded

again, and imperiously, that she submit herself and all her deeds to the

Church. His threatening and storming went for nothing. That body was

weak, but the spirit in it was the spirit of Joan of Arc; and out of that

came the steadfast answer which these people were already so familiar

with and detested so sincerely:



"Let come what may. I will neither do nor say any otherwise than I have

said already in your tribunals."



Then the good theologians took turn about and worried her with reasonings

and arguments and Scriptures; and always they held the lure of the

Sacraments before her famishing soul, and tried to bribe her with them to

surrender her mission to the Church's judgment--that is to their

judgment--as if they were the Church! But it availed nothing. I could

have told them that beforehand, if they had asked me. But they never

asked me anything; I was too humble a creature for their notice.



Then the interview closed with a threat; a threat of fearful import; a

threat calculated to make a Catholic Christian feel as if the ground were

sinking from under him:



"The Church calls upon you to submit; disobey, and she will abandon you

as if you were a pagan!"



Think of being abandoned by the Church!--that August Power in whose hands

is lodged the fate of the human race; whose scepter stretches beyond the

furthest constellation that twinkles in the sky; whose authority is over

millions that live and over the billions that wait trembling in purgatory

for ransom or doom; whose smile opens the gates of heaven to you, whose

frown delivers you to the fires of everlasting hell; a Power whose

dominion overshadows and belittles the pomps and shows of a village. To

be abandoned by one's King--yes, that is death, and death is much; but to

be abandoned by Rome, to be abandoned by the Church! Ah, death is nothing

to that, for that is consignment to endless life--and such a life!



I could see the red waves tossing in that shoreless lake of fire, I could

see the black myriads of the damned rise out of them and struggle and

sink and rise again; and I knew that Joan was seeing what I saw, while

she paused musing; and I believed that she must yield now, and in truth I

hoped she would, for these men were able to make the threat good and

deliver her over to eternal suffering, and I knew that it was in their

natures to do it.



But I was foolish to think that thought and hope that hope. Joan of Arc

was not made as others are made. Fidelity to principle, fidelity to

truth, fidelity to her word, all these were in her bone and in her

flesh--they were parts of her. She could not change, she could not cast

them out. She was the very genius of Fidelity; she was Steadfastness

incarnated. Where she had taken her stand and planted her foot, there she

would abide; hell itself could not move her from that place.



Her Voices had not given her permission to make the sort of submission

that was required, therefore she would stand fast. She would wait, in

perfect obedience, let come what might.



My heart was like lead in my body when I went out from that dungeon; but

she--she was serene, she was not troubled. She had done what she believed

to be her duty, and that was sufficient; the consequences were not her

affair. The last thing she said that time was full of this serenity, full

of contented repose:



"I am a good Christian born and baptized, and a good Christian I will

die."







  15 Undaunted by Threat of Burning



TWO WEEKS went by; the second of May was come, the chill was departed out

of the air, the wild flowers were springing in the glades and glens, the

birds were piping in the woods, all nature was brilliant with sunshine,

all spirits were renewed and refreshed, all hearts glad, the world was

alive with hope and cheer, the plain beyond the Seine stretched away soft

and rich and green, the river was limpid and lovely, the leafy islands

were dainty to see, and flung still daintier reflections of themselves

upon the shining water; and from the tall bluffs above the bridge Rouen

was become again a delight to the eye, the most exquisite and satisfying

picture of a town that nestles under the arch of heaven anywhere.



When I say that all hearts were glad and hopeful, I mean it in a general

sense. There were exceptions--we who were the friends of Joan of Arc,

also Joan of Arc herself, that poor girl shut up there in that frowning

stretch of mighty walls and towers: brooding in darkness, so close to the

flooding downpour of sunshine yet so impossibly far away from it; so

longing for any little glimpse of it, yet so implacably denied it by

those wolves in the black gowns who were plotting her death and the

blackening of her good name.



Cauchon was ready to go on with his miserable work. He had a new scheme

to try now. He would see what persuasion could do--argument, eloquence,

poured out upon the incorrigible captive from the mouth of a trained

expert. That was his plan. But the reading of the Twelve Articles to her

was not a part of it. No, even Cauchon was ashamed to lay that

monstrosity before her; even he had a remnant of shame in him, away down

deep, a million fathoms deep, and that remnant asserted itself now and

prevailed.



On this fair second of May, then, the black company gathered itself

together in the spacious chamber at the end of the great hall of the

castle--the Bishop of Beauvais on his throne, and sixty-two minor judges

massed before him, with the guards and recorders at their stations and

the orator at his desk.



Then we heard the far clank of chains, and presently Joan entered with

her keepers and took her seat upon her isolated bench. She was looking

well now, and most fair and beautiful after her fortnight's rest from

wordy persecution.



She glanced about and noted the orator. Doubtless she divined the

situation.



The orator had written his speech all out, and had it in his hand, though

he held it back of him out of sight. It was so thick that it resembled a

book. He began flowing, but in the midst of a flowery period his memory

failed him and he had to snatch a furtive glance at his manuscript--which

much injured the effect. Again this happened, and then a third time. The

poor man's face was red with embarrassment, the whole great house was

pitying him, which made the matter worse; then Joan dropped in a remark

which completed the trouble. She said:



"Read your book--and then I will answer you!"



Why, it was almost cruel the way those moldy veterans laughed; and as for

the orator, he looked so flustered and helpless that almost anybody would

have pitied him, and I had difficulty to keep from doing it myself. Yes,

Joan was feeling very well after her rest, and the native mischief that

was in her lay near the surface. It did not show when she made the

remark, but I knew it was close in there back of the words.



When the orator had gotten back his composure he did a wise thing; for he

followed Joan's advice: he made no more attempts at sham impromptu

oratory, but read his speech straight from his "book." In the speech he

compressed the Twelve Articles into six, and made these his text.



Every now and then he stopped and asked questions, and Joan replied. The

nature of the Church Militant was explained, and once more Joan was asked

to submit herself to it.



She gave her usual answer.



Then she was asked:



"Do you believe the Church can err?"



"I believe it cannot err; but for those deeds and words of mine which

were done and uttered by command of God, I will answer to Him alone."



"Will you say that you have no judge upon earth? Is not our Holy Father

the Pope your judge?"



"I will say nothing about it. I have a good Master who is our Lord, and

to Him I will submit all."



Then came these terrible words:



"If you do not submit to the Church you will be pronounced a heretic by

these judges here present and burned at the stake!"



Ah, that would have smitten you or me dead with fright, but it only

roused the lion heart of Joan of Arc, and in her answer rang that martial

note which had used to stir her soldiers like a bugle-call:



"I will not say otherwise than I have said already; and if I saw the fire

before me I would say it again!"



It was uplifting to hear her battle-voice once more and see the

battle-light burn in her eye. Many there were stirred; every man that was

a man was stirred, whether friend or foe; and Manchon risked his life

again, good soul, for he wrote in the margin of the record in good plain

letters these brave words: "Superba responsio!" and there they have

remained these sixty years, and there you may read them to this day.



"Superba responsio!" Yes, it was just that. For this "superb answer" came

from the lips of a girl of nineteen with death and hell staring her in

the face.



Of course, the matter of the male attire was gone over again; and as

usual at wearisome length; also, as usual, the customary bribe was

offered: if she would discard that dress voluntarily they would let her

hear mass. But she answered as she had often answered before:



"I will go in a woman's robe to all services of the Church if I may be

permitted, but I will resume the other dress when I return to my cell."



They set several traps for her in a tentative form; that is to say, they

placed suppositious propositions before her and cunningly tried to commit

her to one end of the propositions without committing themselves to the

other. But she always saw the game and spoiled it. The trap was in this

form:



"Would you be willing to do so and so if we should give you leave?"



Her answer was always in this form or to this effect:



"When you give me leave, then you will know."



Yes, Joan was at her best that second of May. She had all her wits about

her, and they could not catch her anywhere. It was a long, long session,

and all the old ground was fought over again, foot by foot, and the

orator-expert worked all his persuasions, all his eloquence; but the

result was the familiar one--a drawn battle, the sixty-two retiring upon

their base, the solitary enemy holding her original position within her

original lines.







  16 Joan Stands Defiant Before the Rack



THE BRILLIANT weather, the heavenly weather, the bewitching weather made

everybody's heart to sing, as I have told you; yes, Rouen was feeling

light-hearted and gay, and most willing and ready to break out and laugh

upon the least occasion; and so when the news went around that the young

girl in the tower had scored another defeat against Bishop Cauchon there

was abundant laughter--abundant laughter among the citizens of both

parties, for they all hated the Bishop. It is true, the English-hearted

majority of the people wanted Joan burned, but that did not keep them

from laughing at the man they hated. It would have been perilous for

anybody to laugh at the English chiefs or at the majority of Cauchon's

assistant judges, but to laugh at Cauchon or D'Estivet and Loyseleur was

safe--nobody would report it.



The difference between Cauchon and cochon [1] was not noticeable in

speech, and so there was plenty of opportunity for puns; the

opportunities were not thrown away.



Some of the jokes got well worn in the course of two or three months,

from repeated use; for every time Cauchon started a new trial the folk

said "The sow has littered [2] again"; and every time the trial failed

they said it over again, with its other meaning, "The hog has made a mess

of it."



And so, on the third of May, Noel and I, drifting about the town, heard

many a wide-mouthed lout let go his joke and his laugh, and then move tot

he next group, proud of his wit and happy, to work it off again:



"'Od's blood, the sow has littered five times, and five times has made a

mess of it!"



And now and then one was bold enough to say--but he said it softly:



"Sixty-three and the might of England against a girl, and she camps on

the field five times!"



Cauchon lived in the great palace of the Archbishop, and it was guarded

by English soldiery; but no matter, there was never a dark night but the

walls showed next morning that the rude joker had been there with his

paint and brush. Yes, he had been thee, and had smeared the sacred walls

with pictures of hogs in all attitudes except flattering ones; hogs

clothed in a Bishop's vestments and wearing a Bishop's miter irreverently

cocked on the side of their heads.



Cauchon raged and cursed over his defeats and his impotence during seven

says; then he conceived a new scheme. You shall see what it was; for you

have not cruel hearts, and you would never guess it.



On the ninth of May there was a summons, and Manchon and I got out

materials together and started. But this time we were to go to one of the

other towers--not the one which was Joan's prison. It was round and grim

and massive, and built of the plainest and thickest and solidest

masonry--a dismal and forbidding structure. [3] We entered the circular

room on the ground floor, and I saw what turned me sick--the instruments

of torture and the executioners standing ready! Here you have the black

heart of Cauchon at the blackest, here you have the proof that in his

nature there was no such thing as pity. One wonders if he ever knew his

mother or ever had a sister.



Cauchon was there, and the Vice-Inquisitor and the Abbot of St.

Corneille; also six others, among them that false Loyseleur. The guards

were in their places, the rack was there, and by it stood the executioner

and his aids in their crimson hose and doublets, meet color for their

bloody trade. The picture of Joan rose before me stretched upon the rack,

her feet tied to one end of it, her wrists to the other, and those red

giants turning the windlass and pulling her limbs out of their sockets.

It seemed to me that I could hear the bones snap and the flesh tear

apart, and I did not see how that body of anointed servants of the

merciful Jesus could sit there and look so placid and indifferent.



After a little, Joan arrived and was brought in. She saw the rack, she

saw the attendants, and the same picture which I had been seeing must

have risen in her mind; but do you think she quailed, do you think she

shuddered? No, there was no sign of that sort. She straightened herself

up, and there was a slight curl of scorn about her lip; but as for fear,

she showed not a vestige of it.



This was a memorable session, but it was the shortest one of all the

list. When Joan had taken her seat a r,sum, of her "crimes" was read to

her. Then Cauchon made a solemn speech. It in he said that in the course

of her several trials Joan had refused to answer some of the questions

and had answered others with lies, but that now he was going to have the

truth out of her, and the whole of it.



Her manner was full of confidence this time; he was sure he had found a

way at last to break this child's stubborn spirit and make her beg and

cry. He would score a victory this time and stop the mouths of the jokers

of Rouen. You see, he was only just a man after all, and couldn't stand

ridicule any better than other people. He talked high, and his splotchy

face lighted itself up with all the shifting tints and signs of evil

pleasure and promised triumph--purple, yellow, red, green--they were all

there, with sometimes the dull and spongy blue of a drowned man, the

uncanniest of them all. And finally he burst out in a great passion and

said:



"There is the rack, and there are its ministers! You will reveal all now

or be put to the torture.



"Speak."



Then she made that great answer which will live forever; made it without

fuss or bravado, and yet how fine and noble was the sound of it:



"I will tell you nothing more than I have told you; no, not even if you

tear the limbs from my body. And even if in my pain I did say something

otherwise, I would always say afterward that it was the torture that

spoke and not I."



There was no crushing that spirit. You should have seen Cauchon. Defeated

again, and he had not dreamed of such a thing. I heard it said the next

day, around the town, that he had a full confession all written out, in

his pocket and all ready for Joan to sign. I do not know that that was

true, but it probably was, for her mark signed at the bottom of a

confession would be the kind of evidence (for effect with the public)

which Cauchon and his people were particularly value, you know.



No, there was no crushing that spirit, and no beclouding that clear mind.

Consider the depth, the wisdom of that answer, coming from an ignorant

girl. Why, there were not six men in the world who had ever reflected

that words forced out of a person by horrible tortures were not

necessarily words of verity and truth, yet this unlettered peasant-girl

put her finger upon that flaw with an unerring instinct. I had always

supposed that torture brought out the truth--everybody supposed it; and

when Joan came out with those simple common-sense words they seemed to

flood the place with light. It was like a lightning-flash at midnight

which suddenly reveals a fair valley sprinkled over with silver streams

and gleaming villages and farmsteads where was only an impenetrable world

of darkness before. Manchon stole a sidewise look at me, and his face was

full of surprise; and there was the like to be seen in other faces there.

Consider--they were old, and deeply cultured, yet here was a village maid

able to teach them something which they had not known before. I heard one

of them mutter:



"Verily it is a wonderful creature. She has laid her hand upon an

accepted truth that is as old as the world, and it has crumbled to dust

and rubbish under her touch. Now whence got she that marvelous insight?"



The judges laid their heads together and began to talk now. It was plain,

from chance words which one caught now and then, that Cauchon and

Loyseleur were insisting upon the application of the torture, and that

most of the others were urgently objecting.



Finally Cauchon broke out with a good deal of asperity in his voice and

ordered Joan back to her dungeon. That was a happy surprise for me. I was

not expecting that the Bishop would yield.



When Manchon came home that night he said he had found out why the

torture was not applied.



There were two reasons. One was, a fear that Joan might die under the

torture, which would not suit the English at all; the other was, that the

torture would effect nothing if Joan was going to take back everything

she said under its pains; and as to putting her mark to a confession, it

was believed that not even the rack would ever make her do that.



So all Rouen laughed again, and kept it up for three days, saying:



"The sow has littered six times, and made six messes of it."



And the palace walls got a new decoration--a mitered hog carrying a

discarded rack home on its shoulder, and Loyseleur weeping in its wake.

Many rewards were offered for the capture of these painters, but nobody

applied. Even the English guard feigned blindness and would not see the

artists at work.



The Bishop's anger was very high now. He could not reconcile himself to

the idea of giving up the torture. It was the pleasantest idea he had

invented yet, and he would not cast it by. So he called in some of his

satellites on the twelfth, and urged the torture again. But it was a

failure.



With some, Joan's speech had wrought an effect; others feared she might

die under torture; others did not believe that any amount of suffering

could make her put her mark to a lying confession. There were fourteen

men present, including the Bishop. Eleven of them voted dead against the

torture, and stood their ground in spite of Cauchon's abuse. Two voted

with the Bishop and insisted upon the torture. These two were Loyseleur

and the orator--the man whom Joan had bidden to "read his book"--Thomas

de Courcelles, the renowned pleader and master of eloquence.



Age has taught me charity of speech; but it fails me when I think of

those three names--Cauchon, Courcelles, Loyseleur.



[1] Hog, pig.



[2] Cochonner, to litter, to farrow; also, "to make a mess of"!



[3] The lower half of it remains to-day just as it was then; the upper

half is of a later date. -- TRANSLATOR.







  17 Supreme in Direst Peril



ANOTHER ten days' wait. The great theologians of that treasury of all

valuable knowledge and all wisdom, the University of Paris, were still

weighing and considering and discussing the Twelve Lies.



I had had but little to do these ten days, so I spent them mainly in

walks about the town with Noel. But there was no pleasure in them, our

spirits being so burdened with cares, and the outlook for Joan growing

steadily darker and darker all the time. And then we naturally contrasted

our circumstances with hers: this freedom and sunshine, with her darkness

and chains; our comradeship, with her lonely estate; our alleviations of

one sort and another, with her destitution in all. She was used to

liberty, but now she had none; she was an out-of-door creature by nature

and habit, but now she was shut up day and night in a steel cage like an

animal; she was used to the light, but now she was always in a gloom

where all objects about her were dim and spectral; she was used to the

thousand various sounds which are the cheer and music of a busy life, but

now she heard only the monotonous footfall of the sentry pacing his

watch; she had been fond of talking with her mates, but now there was no

one to talk to; she had had an easy laugh, but it was gone dumb now; she

had been born for comradeship, and blithe and busy work, and all manner

of joyous activities, but here were only dreariness, and leaden hours,

and weary inaction, and brooding stillness, and thoughts that travel by

day and night and night and day round and round in the same circle, and

wear the brain and break the heart with weariness. It was death in life;

yes, death in life, that is what it must have been. And there was another

hard thing about it all. A young girl in trouble needs the soothing

solace and support and sympathy of persons of her own sex, and the

delicate offices and gentle ministries which only these can furnish; yet

in all these months of gloomy captivity in her dungeon Joan never saw the

face of a girl or a woman. Think how her heart would have leaped to see

such a face.



Consider. If you would realize how great Joan of Arc was, remember that

it was out of such a place and such circumstances that she came week

after week and month after month and confronted the master intellects of

France single-handed, and baffled their cunningest schemes, defeated

their ablest plans, detected and avoided their secretest traps and

pitfalls, broke their lines, repelled their assaults, and camped on the

field after every engagement; steadfast always, true to her faith and her

ideals; defying torture, defying the stake, and answering threats of

eternal death and the pains of hell with a simple "Let come what may,

here I take my stand and will abide."



Yes, if you would realize how great was the soul, how profound the

wisdom, and how luminous the intellect of Joan of Arc, you must study her

there, where she fought out that long fight all alone--and not merely

against the subtlest brains and deepest learning of France, but against

the ignoble deceits, the meanest treacheries, and the hardest hearts to

be found in any land, pagan or Christian.



She was great in battle--we all know that; great in foresight; great in

loyalty and patriotism; great in persuading discontented chiefs and

reconciling conflicting interests and passions; great in the ability to

discover merit and genius wherever it lay hidden; great in picturesque

and eloquent speech; supremely great in the gift of firing the hearts of

hopeless men and noble enthusiasms, the gift of turning hares into

heroes, slaves and skulkers into battalions that march to death with

songs on their lips. But all these are exalting activities; they keep

hand and heart and brain keyed up to their work; there is the joy of

achievement, the inspiration of stir and movement, the applause which

hails success; the soul is overflowing with life and energy, the

faculties are at white heat; weariness, despondency, inertia--these do

not exist.



Yes, Joan of Arc was great always, great everywhere, but she was greatest

in the Rouen trials.



There she rose above the limitations and infirmities of our human nature,

and accomplished under blighting and unnerving and hopeless conditions

all that her splendid equipment of moral and intellectual forces could

have accomplished if they had been supplemented by the mighty helps of

hope and cheer and light, the presence of friendly faces, and a fair and

equal fight, with the great world looking on and wondering.







  18 Condemned Yet Unafraid



TOWARD THE END of the ten-day interval the University of Paris rendered

its decision concerning the Twelve Articles. By this finding, Joan was

guilty upon all the counts: she must renounce her errors and make

satisfaction, or be abandoned to the secular arm for punishment.



The University's mind was probably already made up before the Articles

were laid before it; yet it took it from the fifth to the eighteenth to

produce its verdict. I think the delay may have been caused by temporary

difficulties concerning two points:



1. As to who the fiends were who were represented in Joan's Voices; 2. As

to whether her saints spoke French only.



You understand, the University decided emphatically that it was fiends

who spoke in those Voices; it would need to prove that, and it did. It

found out who those fiends were, and named them in the verdict: Belial,

Satan, and Behemoth. This has always seemed a doubtful thing to me, and

not entitled to much credit. I think so for this reason: if the

University had actually known it was those three, it would for very

consistency's sake have told how it knew it, and not stopped with the

mere assertion, since it had made Joan explain how she knew they were not

fiends. Does not that seem reasonable? To my mind the University's

position was weak, and I will tell you why. It had claimed that Joan's

angels were devils in disguise, and we all know that devils do disguise

themselves as angels; up to that point the University's position was

strong; but you see yourself that it eats its own argument when it turns

around and pretends that it can tell who such apparitions are, while

denying the like ability to a person with as good a head on her shoulders

as the best one the University could produce.



The doctors of the University had to see those creatures in order to

know; and if Joan was deceived, it is argument that they in their turn

could also be deceived, for their insight and judgment were surely not

clearer than hers.



As to the other point which I have thought may have proved a difficulty

and cost the University delay, I will touch but a moment upon that, and

pass on. The University decided that it was blasphemy for Joan to say

that her saints spoke French and not English, and were on the French side

in political sympathies. I think that the thing which troubled the

doctors of theology was this: they had decided that the three Voices were

Satan and two other devils; but they had also decided that these Voices

were not on the French side--thereby tacitly asserting that they were on

the English side; and if on the English side, then they must be angels

and not devils. Otherwise, the situation was embarrassing. You see, the

University being the wisest and deepest and most erudite body in the

world, it would like to be logical if it could, for the sake of its

reputation; therefore it would study and study, days and days, trying to

find some good common-sense reason for proving the Voices to be devils in

Article No. 1 and proving them to be angels in Article No. 10. However,

they had to give it up. They found no way out; and so, to this day, the

University's verdict remains just so--devils in No. 1, angels in No. 10;

and no way to reconcile the discrepancy.



The envoys brought the verdict to Rouen, and with it a letter for Cauchon

which was full of fervid praise. The University complimented him on his

zeal in hunting down this woman "whose venom had infected the faithful of

the whole West," and as recompense it as good as promised him "a crown of

imperishable glory in heaven." Only that!--a crown in heaven; a

promissory note and no indorser; always something away off yonder; not a

word about the Archbishopric of Rouen, which was the thing Cauchon was

destroying his soul for. A crown in heaven; it must have sounded like a

sarcasm to him, after all his hard work. What should he do in heaven? he

did not know anybody there.



On the nineteenth of May a court of fifty judges sat in the

archiepiscopal palace to discuss Joan's fate. A few wanted her delivered

over to the secular arm at once for punishment, but the rest insisted

that she be once more "charitably admonished" first.



So the same court met in the castle on the twenty-third, and Joan was

brought to the bar. Pierre Maurice, a canon of Rouen, made a speech to

Joan in which he admonished her to save her life and her soul by

renouncing her errors and surrendering to the Church. He finished with a

stern threat: if she remained obstinate the damnation of her soul was

certain, the destruction of her body probable. But Joan was immovable.

She said:



"If I were under sentence, and saw the fire before me, and the

executioner ready to light it--more, if I were in the fire itself, I

would say none but the things which I have said in these trials; and I

would abide by them till I died."



A deep silence followed now, which endured some moments. It lay upon me

like a weight. I knew it for an omen. Then Cauchon, grave and solemn,

turned to Pierre Maurice:



"Have you anything further to say?"



The priest bowed low, and said:



"Nothing, my lord."



"Prisoner at the bar, have you anything further to say?"



"Nothing."



"Then the debate is closed. To-morrow, sentence will be pronounced.

Remove the prisoner."



She seemed to go from the place erect and noble. But I do not know; my

sight was dim with tears.



To-morrow--twenty-fourth of May! Exactly a year since I saw her go

speeding across the plain at the head of her troops, her silver helmet

shining, her silvery cape fluttering in the wind, her white plumes

flowing, her sword held aloft; saw her charge the Burgundian camp three

times, and carry it; saw her wheel to the right and spur for the duke's

reserves; saws her fling herself against it in the last assault she was

ever to make. And now that fatal day was come again--and see what it was

bringing!







  19 Our Last Hopes of Rescue Fail



JOAN HAD been adjudged guilty of heresy, sorcery, and all the other

terrible crimes set forth in the Twelve Articles, and her life was in

Cauchon's hands at last. He could send her to the stake at once. His work

was finished now, you think? He was satisfied? Not at all. What would his

Archbishopric be worth if the people should get the idea into their heads

that this faction of interested priests, slaving under the English lash,

had wrongly condemned and burned Joan of Arc, Deliverer of France? That

would be to make of her a holy martyr. Then her spirit would rise from

her body's ashes, a thousandfold reinforced, and sweep the English

domination into the sea, and Cauchon along with it. No, the victory was

not complete yet. Joan's guilt must be established by evidence which

would satisfy the people. Where was that evidence to be found? There was

only one person in the world who could furnish it--Joan of Arc herself.

She must condemn herself, and in public--at least she must seem to do it.



But how was this to be managed? Weeks had been spent already in trying to

get her to surrender--time wholly wasted; what was to persuade her now?

Torture had been threatened, the fire had been threatened; what was left?

Illness, deadly fatigue, and the sight of the fire, the presence of the

fire! That was left.



Now that was a shrewd thought. She was but a girl after all, and, under

illness and exhaustion, subject to a girl's weaknesses.



Yes, it was shrewdly thought. She had tacitly said herself that under the

bitter pains of the rack they would be able to extort a false confession

from her. It was a hint worth remembering, and it was remembered.



She had furnished another hint at the same time: that as soon as the

pains were gone, she would retract the confession. That hint was also

remembered.



She had herself taught them what to do, you see. First, they must wear

out her strength, then frighten her with the fire. Second, while the

fright was on her, she must be made to sign a paper.



But she would demand a reading of the paper. They could not venture to

refuse this, with the public there to hear. Suppose that during the

reading her courage should return?--she would refuse to sign then. Very

well, even that difficulty could be got over. They could read a short

paper of no importance, then slip a long and deadly one into its place

and trick her into signing that.



Yet there was still one other difficulty. If they made her seem to

abjure, that would free her from the death-penalty. They could keep her

in a prison of the Church, but they could not kill her.



That would not answer; for only her death would content the English.

Alive she was a terror, in a prison or out of it. She had escaped from

two prisons already.



But even that difficulty could be managed. Cauchon would make promises to

her; in return she would promise to leave off the male dress. He would

violate his promises, and that would so situate her that she would not be

able to keep hers. Her lapse would condemn her to the stake, and the

stake would be ready.



These were the several moves; there was nothing to do but to make them,

each in its order, and the game was won. One might almost name the day

that the betrayed girl, the most innocent creature in France and the

noblest, would go to her pitiful death.



The world knows now that Cauchon's plan was as I have sketched it to you,

but the world did not know it at that time. There are sufficient

indications that Warwick and all the other English chiefs except the

highest one--the Cardinal of Winchester--were not let into the secret,

also, that only Loyseleur and Beaupere, on the French side, knew the

scheme. Sometimes I have doubted if even Loyseleur and Beaupere knew the

whole of it at first. However, if any did, it was these two.



It is usual to let the condemned pass their last night of life in peace,

but this grace was denied to poor Joan, if one may credit the rumors of

the time. Loyseleur was smuggled into her presence, and in the character

of priest, friend, and secret partisan of France and hater of England, he

spent some hours in beseeching her to do "the only right an righteous

thing"--submit to the Church, as a good Christian should; and that then

she would straightway get out of the clutches of the dreaded English and

be transferred to the Church's prison, where she would be honorably used

and have women about her for jailers. He knew where to touch her. He knew

how odious to her was the presence of her rough and profane English

guards; he knew that her Voices had vaguely promised something which she

interpreted to be escape, rescue, release of some sort, and the chance to

burst upon France once more and victoriously complete the great work

which she had been commissioned of Heaven to do. Also there was that

other thing: if her failing body could be further weakened by loss of

rest and sleep now, her tired mind would be dazed and drowsy on the

morrow, and in ill condition to stand out against persuasions, threats,

and the sight of the stake, and also be purblind to traps and snares

which it would be swift to detect when in its normal estate.



I do not need to tell you that there was no rest for me that night. Nor

for Noel. We went to the main gate of the city before nightfall, with a

hope in our minds, based upon that vague prophecy of Joan's Voices which

seemed to promise a rescue by force at the last moment. The immense news

had flown swiftly far and wide that at last Joan of Arc was condemned,

and would be sentenced and burned alive on the morrow; and so crowds of

people were flowing in at the gate, and other crowds were being refused

admission by the soldiery; these being people who brought doubtful passes

or none at all. We scanned these crowds eagerly, but thee was nothing

about them to indicate that they were our old war-comrades in disguise,

and certainly there were no familiar faces among them. And so, when the

gate was closed at last, we turned away grieved, and more disappointed

than we cared to admit, either in speech or thought.



The streets were surging tides of excited men. It was difficult to make

one's way. Toward midnight our aimless tramp brought us to the

neighborhood of the beautiful church of St. Ouen, and there all was

bustle and work. The square was a wilderness of torches and people; and

through a guarded passage dividing the pack, laborers were carrying

planks and timbers and disappearing with them through the gate of the

churchyard. We asked what was going forward; the answer was:



"Scaffolds and the stake. Don't you know that the French witch is to be

burned in the morning?"



Then we went away. We had no heart for that place.



At dawn we were at the city gate again; this time with a hope which our

wearied bodies and fevered minds magnified into a large probability. We

had heard a report that the Abbot of Jumieges with all his monks was

coming to witness the burning. Our desire, abetted by our imagination,

turned those nine hundred monks into Joan's old campaigners, and their

Abbot into La Hire or the Bastard or D'Alencon; and we watched them file

in, unchallenged, the multitude respectfully dividing and uncovering

while they passed, with our hearts in our throats and our eyes swimming

with tears of joy and pride and exultation; and we tried to catch

glimpses of the faces under the cowls, and were prepared to give signal

to any recognized face that we were Joan's men and ready and eager to

kill and be killed in the good cause. How foolish we were!



But we were young, you know, and youth hopeth all things, believeth all

things.







  20 The Betrayal



IN THE MORNING I was at my official post. It was on a platform raised the

height of a man, in the churchyard, under the eaves of St. Ouen. On this

same platform was a crowd of priests and important citizens, and several

lawyers. Abreast it, with a small space between, was another and larger

platform, handsomely canopied against sun and rain, and richly carpeted;

also it was furnished with comfortable chairs, and with two which were

more sumptuous than the others, and raised above the general level. One

of these two was occupied by a prince of the royal blood of England, his

Eminence the Cardinal of Winchester; the other by Cauchon, Bishop of

Beauvais. In the rest of the chairs sat three bishops, the

Vice-Inquisitor, eight abbots, and the sixty-two friars and lawyers who

had sat as Joan's judges in her late trials.



Twenty steps in front of the platforms was another--a table-topped

pyramid of stone, built up in retreating courses, thus forming steps. Out

of this rose that grisly thing, the stake; about the stake bundles of

fagots and firewood were piled. On the ground at the base of the pyramid

stood three crimson figures, the executioner and his assistants. At their

feet lay what had been a goodly heap of brands, but was now a smokeless

nest of ruddy coals; a foot or two from this was a supplemental supply of

wood and fagots compacted into a pile shoulder-high and containing as

much as six packhorse loads. Think of that. We seem so delicately made,

so destructible, so insubstantial; yet it is easier to reduce a granite

statue to ashes than it is to do that with a man's body.



The sight of the stake sent physical pains tingling down the nerves of my

body; and yet, turn as I would, my eyes would keep coming back t it, such

fascination has the gruesome and the terrible for us.



The space occupied by the platforms and the stake was kept open by a wall

of English soldiery, standing elbow to elbow, erect and stalwart figures,

fine and sightly in their polished steel; while from behind them on every

hand stretched far away a level plain of human heads; and there was no

window and no housetop within our view, howsoever distant, but was black

with patches and masses of people.



But there was no noise, no stir; it was as if the world was dead. The

impressiveness of this silence and solemnity was deepened by a leaden

twilight, for the sky was hidden by a pall of low-hanging storm-clouds;

and above the remote horizon faint winkings of heat-lightning played, and

now and then one caught the dull mutterings and complainings of distant

thunder.



At last the stillness was broken. From beyond the square rose an

indistinct sound, but familiar--court, crisp phrases of command; next I

saw the plain of heads dividing, and the steady swing of a marching host

was glimpsed between. My heart leaped for a moment. Was it La Hire and

his hellions? No--that was not their gait. No, it was the prisoner and

her escort; it was Joan of Arc, under guard, that was coming; my spirits

sank as low as they had been before. Weak as she was they made her walk;

they would increase her weakness all they could. The distance was not

great--it was but a few hundred yards--but short as it was it was a heavy

tax upon one who had been lying chained in one spot for months, and whose

feet had lost their powers from inaction. Yes, and for a year Joan had

known only the cool damps of a dungeon, and now she was dragging herself

through this sultry summer heat, this airless and suffocating void. As

she entered the gate, drooping with exhaustion, there was that creature

Loyseleur at her side with his head bent to her ear. We knew afterward

that he had been with her again this morning in the prison wearying her

with his persuasions and enticing her with false promises, and that he

was now still at the same work at the gate, imploring her to yield

everything that would be required of her, and assuring her that if she

would do this all would be well with her: she would be rid of the dreaded

English and find safety in the powerful shelter and protection of the

Church. A miserable man, a stony-hearted man!



The moment Joan was seated on the platform she closed her eyes and

allowed her chin to fall; and so sat, with her hands nestling in her lap,

indifferent to everything, caring for nothing but rest. And she was so

white again--white as alabaster.



How the faces of that packed mass of humanity lighted up with interest,

and with what intensity all eyes gazed upon this fragile girl! And how

natural it was; for these people realized that at last they were looking

upon that person whom they had so long hungered to see; a person whose

name and fame filled all Europe, and made all other names and all other

renowns insignificant by comparisons; Joan of Arc, the wonder of the

time, and destined to be the wonder of all times!



And I could read as by print, in their marveling countenances, the words

that were drifting through their minds: "Can it be true, is it

believable, that it is this little creature, this girl, this child with

the good face, the sweet face, the beautiful face, the dear and bonny

face, that has carried fortresses by storm, charged at the head of

victorious armies, blown the might of England out of her path with a

breath, and fought a long campaign, solitary and alone, against the

massed brains and learning of France--and had won it if the fight had

been fair!"



Evidently Cauchon had grown afraid of Manchon because of his pretty

apparent leanings toward Joan, for another recorder was in the chief

place here, which left my master and me nothing to do but sit idle and

look on.



Well, I suppose that everything had been done which could be thought of

to tire Joan's body and mind, but it was a mistake; one more device had

been invented. This was to preach a long sermon to her in that oppressive

heat.



When the preacher began, she cast up one distressed and disappointed

look, then dropped her head again. This preacher was Guillaume Erard, an

oratorical celebrity. He got his text from the Twelve Lies. He emptied

upon Joan al the calumnies in detail that had been bottled up in that

mass of venom, and called her all the brutal names that the Twelve were

labeled with, working himself into a whirlwind of fury as he went on; but

his labors were wasted, she seemed lost in dreams, she made no sign, she

did not seem to hear. At last he launched this apostrophe:



"O France, how hast thou been abused! Thou hast always been the home of

Christianity; but now, Charles, who calls himself thy King and governor,

indorses, like the heretic and schismatic that he is, the words and deeds

of a worthless and infamous woman!" Joan raised her head, and her eyes

began to burn and flash. The preacher turned to her: "It is to you, Joan,

that I speak, and I tell you that your King is schismatic and a heretic!"



Ah, he might abuse her to his heart's content; she could endure that; but

to her dying moment she could never hear in patience a word against that

ingrate, that treacherous dog our King, whose proper place was here, at

this moment, sword in hand, routing these reptiles and saving this most

noble servant that ever King had in this world--and he would have been

there if he had not been what I have called him. Joan's loyal soul was

outraged, and she turned upon the preacher and flung out a few words with

a spirit which the crowd recognized as being in accordance with the Joan

of Arc traditions:



"By my faith, sir! I make bold to say and swear, on pain of death, that

he is the most noble Christian of all Christians, and the best lover of

the faith and the Church!"



There was an explosion of applause from the crowd--which angered the

preacher, for he had been aching long to hear an expression like this,

and now that it was come at last it had fallen to the wrong person: he

had done all the work; the other had carried off all the spoil. He

stamped his foot and shouted to the sheriff:



"Make her shut up!"



That made the crowd laugh.



A mob has small respect for a grown man who has to call on a sheriff to

protect him from a sick girl.



Joan had damaged the preacher's cause more with one sentence than he had

helped it with a hundred; so he was much put out, and had trouble to get

a good start again. But he needn't have bothered; thee was no occasion.

It was mainly an English-feeling mob. It had but obeyed a law of our

nature--an irresistible law--to enjoy and applaud a spirited and promptly

delivered retort, no matter who makes it. The mob was with the preacher;

it had been beguiled for a moment, but only that; it would soon return.

It was there to see this girl burnt; so that it got that

satisfaction--without too much delay--it would be content.



Presently the preacher formally summoned Joan to submit to the Church. He

made the demand with confidence, for he had gotten the idea from

Loyseleur and Beaupere that she was worn to the bone, exhausted, and

would not be able to put forth any more resistance; and, indeed, to look

at her it seemed that they must be right. Nevertheless, she made one more

effort to hold her ground, and said, wearily:



"As to that matter, I have answered my judges before. I have told them to

report all that I have said and done to our Holy Father the Pope--to

whom, and to God first, I appeal."



Again, out of her native wisdom, she had brought those words of

tremendous import, but was ignorant of their value. But they could have

availed her nothing in any case, now, with the stake there and these

thousands of enemies about her. Yet they made every churchman there

blench, and the preacher changed the subject with all haste. Well might

those criminals blench, for Joan's appeal of her case to the Pope

stripped Cauchon at once of jurisdiction over it, and annulled all that

he and his judges had already done in the matter and all that they should

do in it henceforth.



Joan went on presently to reiterate, after some further talk, that she

had acted by command of God in her deeds and utterances; then, when an

attempt was made to implicate the King, and friends of hers and his, she

stopped that. She said:



"I charge my deeds and words upon no one, neither upon my King nor any

other. If there is any fault in them, I am responsible and no other."



She was asked if she would not recant those of her words and deeds which

had been pronounced evil by her judges. Here answer made confusion and

damage again:



"I submit them to God and the Pope."



The Pope once more! It was very embarrassing. Here was a person who was

asked to submit her case to the Church, and who frankly consents--offers

to submit it to the very head of it. What more could any one require? How

was one to answer such a formidably unanswerable answer as that?



The worried judges put their heads together and whispered and planned and

discussed. Then they brought forth this sufficiently shambling

conclusion--but it was the best they could do, in so close a place: they

said the Pope was so far away; and it was not necessary to go to him

anyway, because the present judges had sufficient power and authority to

deal with the present case, and were in effect "the Church" to that

extent. At another time they could have smiled at this conceit, but not

now; they were not comfortable enough now.



The mob was getting impatient. It was beginning to put on a threatening

aspect; it was tired of standing, tired of the scorching heat; and the

thunder was coming nearer, the lightning was flashing brighter. It was

necessary to hurry this matter to a close. Erard showed Joan a written

form, which had been prepared and made all ready beforehand, and asked

her to abjure.



"Abjure? What is abjure?"



She did not know the word. It was explained to her by Massieu. She tried

to understand, but she was breaking, under exhaustion, and she could not

gather the meaning. It was all a jumble and confusion of strange words.

In her despair she sent out this beseeching cry:



"I appeal to the Church universal whether I ought to abjure or not!"



Erard exclaimed:



"You shall abjure instantly, or instantly be burnt!"



She glanced up, at those awful words, and for the first time she saw the

stake and the mass of red coals--redder and angrier than ever now under

the constantly deepening storm-gloom. She gasped and staggered up out of

her seat muttering and mumbling incoherently, and gazed vacantly upon the

people and the scene about her like one who is dazed, or thinks he

dreams, and does not know where he is.



The priests crowded about her imploring her to sign the paper, there were

many voices beseeching and urging her at once, there was great turmoil

and shouting and excitement among the populace and everywhere.



"Sign! sign!" from the priests; "sign--sign and be saved!" And Loyseleur

was urging at her ear, "Do as I told you--do not destroy yourself!"



Joan said plaintively to these people:



"Ah, you do not do well to seduce me."



The judges joined their voices to the others. Yes, even the iron in their

hearts melted, and they said:



"O Joan, we pity you so! Take back what you have said, or we must deliver

you up to punishment."



And now there was another voice--it was from the other platform--pealing

solemnly above the din: Cauchon's--reading the sentence of death!



Joan's strength was all spent. She stood looking about her in a

bewildered way a moment, then slowly she sank to her knees, and bowed her

head and said:



"I submit."



They gave her no time to reconsider--they knew the peril of that. The

moment the words were out of her mouth Massieu was reading to her the

abjuration, and she was repeating the words after him mechanically,

unconsciously--and smiling; for her wandering mind was far away in some

happier world.



Then this short paper of six lines was slipped aside and a long one of

many pages was smuggled into its place, and she, noting nothing, put her

mark on it, saying, in pathetic apology, that she did not know how to

write. But a secretary of the King of England was there to take care of

that defect; he guided her hand with his own, and wrote her

name--Jehanne.



The great crime was accomplished. She had signed--what? She did not

know--but the others knew. She had signed a paper confessing herself a

sorceress, a dealer with devils, a liar, a blasphermer of God and His

angels, a lover of blood, a promoter of sedition, cruel, wicked,

commissioned of Satan; and this signature of hers bound her to resume the

dress of a woman.



There were other promises, but that one would answer, without the others;

and that one could be made to destroy her.



Loyseleur pressed forward and praised her for having done "such a good

day's work."



But she was still dreamy, she hardly heard.



Then Cauchon pronounced the words which dissolved the excommunication and

restored her to her beloved Church, with all the dear privileges of

worship. Ah, she heard that! You could see it in the deep gratitude that

rose in her face and transfigured it with joy.



But how transient was that happiness! For Cauchon, without a tremor of

pity in his voice, added these crushing words:



"And that she may repent of her crimes and repeat them no more, she is

sentenced to perpetual imprisonment, with the bread of affliction and the

water of anguish!"



Perpetual imprisonment! She had never dreamed of that--such a thing had

never been hinted to her by Loyseleur or by any other. Loyseleur had

distinctly said and promised that "all would be well with her." And the

very last words spoken to her by Erard, on that very platform, when he

was urging her to abjure, was a straight, unqualified promised--that if

she would do it she should go free from captivity.



She stood stunned and speechless a moment; then she remembered, with such

solacement as the thought could furnish, that by another clear promise

made by Cauchon himself--she would at least be the Church's captive, and

have women about her in place of a brutal foreign soldiery. So she turned

to the body of priests and said, with a sad resignation:



"Now, you men of the Church, take me to your prison, and leave me no

longer in the hands of the English"; and she gathered up her chains and

prepared to move.



But alas! now came these shameful words from Cauchon--and with them a

mocking laugh:



"Take her to the prison whence she came!"



Poor abused girl! She stood dumb, smitten, paralyzed. It was pitiful to

see. She had been beguiled, lied to, betrayed; she saw it all now.



The rumbling of a drum broke upon the stillness, and for just one moment

she thought of the glorious deliverance promised by her Voices--I read it

in the rapture that lit her face; then she saw what it was--her prison

escort--and that light faded, never to revive again. And now her head

began a piteous rocking motion, swaying slowly, this way and that, as is

the way when one is suffering unwordable pain, or when one's heart is

broken; then drearily she went from us, with her face in her hands, and

sobbing bitterly.







  21 Respited Only for Torture



THERE IS no certainty that any one in all Rouen was in the secret of the

deep game which Cauchon was playing except the Cardinal of Winchester.

Then you can imagine the astonishment and stupefaction of that vast mob

gathered there and those crowds of churchmen assembled on the two

platforms, when they saw Joan of Arc moving away, alive and

whole--slipping out of their grip at last, after all this tedious

waiting, all this tantalizing expectancy.



Nobody was able to stir or speak for a while, so paralyzing was the

universal astonishment, so unbelievable the fact that the stake was

actually standing there unoccupied and its prey gone.



Then suddenly everybody broke into a fury of rage; maledictions and

charges of treachery began to fly freely; yes, and even stones: a stone

came near killing the Cardinal of Winchester--it just missed his head.

But the man who threw it was not to blame, for he was excited, and a

person who is excited never can throw straight.



The tumult was very great, indeed, for a while. In the midst of it a

chaplain of the Cardinal even forgot the proprieties so far as to

oppobriously assail the August Bishop of Beauvais himself, shaking his

fist in his face and shouting:



"By God, you are a traitor!"



"You lie!" responded the Bishop.



He a traitor! Oh, far from it; he certainly was the last Frenchman that

any Briton had a right to bring that charge against.



The Early of Warwick lost his temper, too. He was a doughty soldier, but

when it came to the intellectuals--when it came to delicate chicane, and

scheming, and trickery--he couldn't see any further through a millstone

than another. So he burst out in his frank warrior fashion, and swore

that the King of England was being treacherously used, and that Joan of

Arc was going to be allowed to cheat the stake. But they whispered

comfort into his ear:



"Give yourself no uneasiness, my lord; we shall soon have her again."



Perhaps the like tidings found their way all around, for good news

travels fast as well as bad. At any rate, the ragings presently quieted

down, and the huge concourse crumbled apart and disappeared. And thus we

reached the noon of that fearful Thursday.



We two youths were happy; happier than any words can tell--for we were

not in the secret any more than the rest. Joan's life was saved. We knew

that, and that was enough. France would hear of this day's infamous

work--and then! Why, then her gallant sons would flock to her standard by

thousands and thousands, multitudes upon multitudes, and their wrath

would be like the wrath of the ocean when the storm-winds sweep it; and

they would hurl themselves against this doomed city and overwhelm it like

the resistless tides of that ocean, and Joan of Arc would march again!



In six days--seven days--one short week--noble France, grateful France,

indignant France, would be thundering at these gates--let us count the

hours, let us count the minutes, let us count the seconds! O happy day, O

day of ecstasy, how our hearts sang in our bosoms!



For we were young then, yes, we were very young.



Do you think the exhausted prisoner was allowed to rest and sleep after

she had spent the small remnant of her strength in dragging her tired

body back to the dungeon?



No, there was no rest for her, with those sleuth-hounds on her track.

Cauchon and some of his people followed her to her lair straightway; they

found her dazed and dull, her mental and physical forces in a state of

prostration. They told her she had abjured; that she had made certain

promises--among them, to resume the apparel of her sex; and that if she

relapsed, the Church would cast her out for good and all. She heard the

words, but they had no meaning to her. She was like a person who has

taken a narcotic and is dying for sleep, dying for rest from nagging,

dying to be let alone, and who mechanically does everything the

persecutor asks, taking but dull note of the things done, and but dully

recording them in the memory. And so Joan put on the gown which Cauchon

and his people had brought; and would come to herself by and by, and have

at first but a dim idea as to when and how the change had come about.



Cauchon went away happy and content. Joan had resumed woman's dress

without protest; also she had been formally warned against relapsing. He

had witnesses to these facts. How could matters be better?



But suppose she should not relapse?



Why, then she must be forced to do it.



Did Cauchon hint to the English guards that thenceforth if they chose to

make their prisoner's captivity crueler and bitterer than ever, no

official notice would be taken of it? Perhaps so; since the guards did

begin that policy at once, and no official notice was taken of it. Yes,

from that moment Joan's life in that dungeon was made almost unendurable.

Do not ask me to enlarge upon it. I will not do it.







  22 Joan Gives the Fatal Answer



FRIDAY and Saturday were happy days for Noel and me. Our minds were full

of our splendid dream of France aroused--France shaking her mane--France

on the march--France at the gates--Rouen in ashes, and Joan free! Our

imagination was on fire; we were delirious with pride and joy. For we

were very young, as I have said.



We knew nothing about what had been happening in the dungeon in the

yester-afternoon. We supposed that as Joan had abjured and been taken

back into the forgiving bosom of the Church, she was being gently used

now, and her captivity made as pleasant and comfortable for her as the

circumstances would allow. So, in high contentment, we planned out our

share in the great rescue, and fought our part of the fight over and over

again during those two happy days--as happy days as ever I have known.



Sunday morning came. I was awake, enjoying the balmy, lazy weather, and

thinking. Thinking of the rescue--what else? I had no other thought now.

I was absorbed in that, drunk with the happiness of it.



I heard a voice shouting far down the street, and soon it came nearer,

and I caught the words:



"Joan of Arc has relapsed! The witch's time has come!"



It stopped my heart, it turned my blood to ice. That was more than sixty

years ago, but that triumphant note rings as clear in my memory to-day as

it rang in my ear that long-vanished summer morning. We are so strangely

made; the memories that could make us happy pass away; it is the memories

that break our hearts that abide.



Soon other voices took up that cry--tens, scores, hundreds of voices; all

the world seemed filled with the brutal joy of it. And there were other

clamors--the clatter of rushing feet, merry congratulations, bursts of

coarse laughter, the rolling of drums, the boom and crash of distant

bands profaning the sacred day with the music of victory and

thanksgiving.



About the middle of the afternoon came a summons for Manchon and me to go

to Joan's dungeon--a summons from Cauchon. But by that time distrust had

already taken possession of the English and their soldiery again, and all

Rouen was in an angry and threatening mood. We could see plenty of

evidences of this from our own windows--fist-shaking, black looks,

tumultuous tides of furious men billowing by along the street.



And we learned that up at the castle things were going very badly,

indeed; that there was a great mob gathered there who considered the

relapse a lie and a priestly trick, and among them many half-drunk

English soldiers. Moreover, these people had gone beyond words. They had

laid hands upon a number of churchmen who were trying to enter the

castle, and it had been difficult work to rescue them and save their

lives.



And so Manchon refused to go. He said he would not go a step without a

safeguard from Warwick. So next morning Warwick sent an escort of

soldiers, and then we went. Matters had not grown peacefuler meantime,

but worse. The soldiers protected us from bodily damage, but as we passed

through the great mob at the castle we were assailed with insults and

shameful epithets. I bore it well enough, though, and said to myself,

with secret satisfaction, "In three or four short days, my lads, you will

be employing your tongues in a different sort from this--and I shall be

there to hear."



To my mind these were as good as dead men. How many of them would still

be alive after the rescue that was coming? Not more than enough to amuse

the executioner a short half-hour, certainly.



It turned out that the report was true. Joan had relapsed. She was

sitting there in her chains, clothed again in her male attire.



She accused nobody. That was her way. It was not in her character to hold

a servant to account for what his master had made him do, and her mind

had cleared now, and she knew that the advantage which had been taken of

her the previous morning had its origin, not in the subordinate but in

the master--Cauchon.



Here is what had happened. While Joan slept, in the early morning of

Sunday, one of the guards stole her female apparel and put her male

attire in its place. When she woke she asked for the other dress, but the

guards refused to give it back. She protested, and said she was forbidden

to wear the male dress. But they continued to refuse. She had to have

clothing, for modesty's sake; moreover, she saw that she could not save

her life if she must fight for it against treacheries like this; so she

put on the forbidden garments, knowing what the end would be. She was

weary of the struggle, poor thing.



We had followed in the wake of Cauchon, the Vice-Inquisitor, and the

others--six or eight--and when I saw Joan sitting there, despondent,

forlorn, and still in chains, when I was expecting to find her situation

so different, I did not know what to make of it. The shock was very

great. I had doubted the relapse perhaps; possibly I had believed in it,

but had not realized it.



Cauchon's victory was complete. He had had a harassed and irritated and

disgusted look for a long time, but that was all gone now, and

contentment and serenity had taken its place. His purple face was full of

tranquil and malicious happiness. He went trailing his robes and stood

grandly in front of Joan, with his legs apart, and remained so more than

a minute, gloating over her and enjoying the sight of this poor ruined

creature, who had won so lofty a place for him in the service of the meek

and merciful Jesus, Saviour of the World, Lord of the Universe--in case

England kept her promise to him, who kept no promises himself.



Presently the judges began to question Joan. One of them, named

Marguerie, who was a man with more insight than prudence, remarked upon

Joan's change of clothing, and said:



"There is something suspicious about this. How could it have come about

without connivance on the part of others? Perhaps even something worse?"



"Thousand devils!" screamed Cauchon, in a fury. "Will you shut your

mouth?"



"Armagnac! Traitor!" shouted the soldiers on guard, and made a rush for

Marguerie with their lances leveled. It was with the greatest difficulty

that he was saved from being run through the body. He made no more

attempts to help the inquiry, poor man. The other judges proceeded with

the questionings.



"Why have you resumed this male habit?"



I did not quite catch her answer, for just then a soldier's halberd

slipped from his fingers and fell on the stone floor with a crash; but I

thought I understood Joan to say that she had resumed it of her own

motion.



"But you have promised and sworn that you would not go back to it."



I was full of anxiety to hear her answer to that question; and when it

came it was just what I was expecting. She said--quiet quietly:



"I have never intended and never understood myself to swear I would not

resume it."



There--I had been sure, all along, that she did not know what she was

doing and saying on the platform Thursday, and this answer of hers was

proof that I had not been mistaken. Then she went on to add this:



"But I had a right to resume it, because the promises made to me have not

been kept--promises that I should be allowed to go to mass and receive

the communion, and that I should be freed from the bondage of these

chains--but they are still upon me, as you see."



"Nevertheless, you have abjured, and have especially promised to return

no more to the dress of a man."



Then Joan held out her fettered hands sorrowfully toward these unfeeling

men and said:



"I would rather die than continue so. But if they may be taken off, and

if I may hear mass, and be removed to a penitential prison, and have a

woman about me, I will be good, and will do what shall seem good to you

that I do."



Cauchon sniffed scoffingly at that. Honor the compact which he and his

had made with her?



Fulfil its conditions? What need of that? Conditions had been a good

thing to concede, temporarily, and for advantage; but they have served

their turn--let something of a fresher sort and of more consequence be

considered. The resumption of the male dress was sufficient for all

practical purposes, but perhaps Joan could be led to add something to

that fatal crime. So Cauchon asked her if her Voices had spoken to her

since Thursday--and he reminded her of her abjuration.



"Yes," she answered; and then it came out that the Voices had talked with

her about the abjuration--told her about it, I suppose. She guilelessly

reasserted the heavenly origin of her mission, and did it with the

untroubled mien of one who was not conscious that she had ever knowingly

repudiated it. So I was convinced once more that she had had no notion of

what she was doing that Thursday morning on the platform. Finally she

said, "My Voices told me I did very wrong to confess that what I had done

was not well." Then she sighed, and said with simplicity, "But it was the

fear of the fire that made me do so."



That is, fear of the fire had made her sign a paper whose contents she

had not understood then, but understood now by revelation of her Voices

and by testimony of her persecutors.



She was sane now and not exhausted; her courage had come back, and with

it her inborn loyalty to the truth. She was bravely and serenely speaking

it again, knowing that it would deliver her body up to that very fire

which had such terrors for her.



That answer of hers was quite long, quite frank, wholly free from

concealments or palliations. It made me shudder; I knew she was

pronouncing sentence of death upon herself. So did poor Manchon. And he

wrote in the margin abreast of it:



"RESPONSIO MORTIFERA."



Fatal answer. Yes, all present knew that it was, indeed, a fatal answer.

Then there fell a silence such as falls in a sick-room when the watchers

of the dying draw a deep breath and say softly one to another, "All is

over."



Here, likewise, all was over; but after some moments Cauchon, wishing to

clinch this matter and make it final, put this question:



"Do you still believe that your Voices are St. Marguerite and St.

Catherine?"



"Yes--and that they come from God."



"Yet you denied them on the scaffold?"



Then she made direct and clear affirmation that she had never had any

intention to deny them; and that if--I noted the if--"if she had made

some retractions and revocations on the scaffold it was from fear of the

fire, and it was a violation of the truth."



There it is again, you see. She certainly never knew what it was she had

done on the scaffold until she was told of it afterward by these people

and by her Voices.



And now she closed this most painful scene with these words; and there

was a weary note in them that was pathetic:



"I would rather do my penance all at once; let me die. I cannot endure

captivity any longer."



The spirit born for sunshine and liberty so longed for release that it

would take it in any form, even that.



Several among the company of judges went from the place troubled and

sorrowful, the others in another mood. In the court of the castle we

found the Earl of Warwick and fifty English waiting, impatient for news.

As soon as Cauchon saw them he shouted--laughing--think of a man

destroying a friendless poor girl and then having the heart to laugh at

it:



"Make yourselves comfortable--it's all over with her!"







  23 The Time Is at Hand



THE YOUNG can sink into abysses of despondency, and it was so with Noel

and me now; but the hopes of the young are quick to rise again, and it

was so with ours. We called back that vague promise of the Voices, and

said the one to the other that the glorious release was to happen at "the

last moment"--"that other time was not the last moment, but this is; it

will happen now; the King will come, La Hire will come, and with them our

veterans, and behind them all France!" And so we were full of heart

again, and could already hear, in fancy, that stirring music the clash of

steel and the war-cries and the uproar of the onset, and in fancy see our

prisoner free, her chains gone, her sword in her hand.



But this dream was to pass also, and come to nothing. Late at night, when

Manchon came in, he said:



"I am come from the dungeon, and I have a message for you from that poor

child."



A message to me! If he had been noticing I think he would have discovered

me--discovered that my indifference concerning the prisoner was a

pretense; for I was caught off my guard, and was so moved and so exalted

to be so honored by her that I must have shown my feeling in my face and

manner.



"A message for me, your reverence?"



"Yes. It is something she wishes done. She said she had noticed the young

man who helps me, and that he had a good face; and did I think he would

do a kindness for her? I said I knew you would, and asked her what it

was, and she said a letter--would you write a letter to her mother?



"And I said you would. But I said I would do it myself, and gladly; but

she said no, that my labors were heavy, and she thought the young man

would not mind the doing of this service for one not able to do it for

herself, she not knowing how to write. Then I would have sent for you,

and at that the sadness vanished out of her face. Why, it was as if she

was going to see a friend, poor friendless thing. But I was not

permitted. I did my best, but the orders remain as strict as ever, the

doors are closed against all but officials; as before, none but officials

may speak to her. So I went back and told her, and she sighed, and was

sad again. Now this is what she begs you to write to her mother. It is

partly a strange message, and to me means nothing, but she said her

mother would understand. You will 'convey her adoring love to her family

and her village friends, and say there will be no rescue, for that this

night--and it is the third time in the twelvemonth, and is final--she has

seen the Vision of the Tree.'"



"How strange!"



"Yes, it is strange, but that is what she said; and said her parents

would understand. And for a little time she was lost in dreams and

thinkings, and her lips moved, and I caught in her muttering these lines,

which she said over two or three times, and they seemed to bring peace

and contentment to her. I set them down, thinking they might have some

connection with her letter and be useful; but it was not so; they were a

mere memory, floating idly in a tired mind, and they have no meaning, at

least no relevancy."



I took the piece of paper, and found what I knew I should find:



And when in exile wand'ring, we Shall fainting yearn for glimpse of thee,

Oh, rise upon our sight!



There was no hope any more. I knew it now. I knew that Joan's letter was

a message to Noel and me, as well as to her family, and that its object

was to banish vain hopes from our minds and tell us from her own mouth of

the blow that was going to fall upon us, so that we, being her soldiers,

would know it for a command to bear it as became us and her, and so

submit to the will of God; and in thus obeying, find assuagement of our

grief. It was like her, for she was always thinking of others, not of

herself. Yes, her heart was sore for us; she could find time to think of

us, the humblest of her servants, and try to soften our pain, lighten the

burden of our troubles--she that was drinking of the bitter waters; she

that was walking in the Valley of the Shadow of Death.



I wrote the letter. You will know what it cost me, without my telling

you. I wrote it with the same wooden stylus which had put upon parchment

the first words ever dictated by Joan of Arc--that high summons to the

English to vacate France, two years past, when she was a lass of

seventeen; it had now set down the last ones which she was ever to

dictate. Then I broke it. For the pen that had served Joan of Arc could

not serve any that would come after her in this earth without abasement.



The next day, May 29th, Cauchon summoned his serfs, and forty-two

responded. It is charitable to believe that the other twenty were ashamed

to come. The forty-two pronounced her a relapsed heretic, and condemned

her to be delivered over to the secular arm. Cauchon thanked them.



Then he sent orders that Joan of Arc be conveyed the next morning to the

place known as the Old Market; and that she be then delivered to the

civil judge, and by the civil judge to the executioner. That meant she

would be burnt.



All the afternoon and evening of Tuesday, the 29th, the news was flying,

and the people of the country-side flocking to Rouen to see the

tragedy--all, at least, who could prove their English sympathies and

count upon admission. The press grew thicker and thicker in the streets,

the excitement grew higher and higher. And now a thing was noticeable

again which had been noticeable more than once before--that there was

pity for Joan in the hearts of many of these people. Whenever she had

been in great danger it had manifested itself, and now it was apparent

again--manifest in a pathetic dumb sorrow which was visible in many

faces.



Early the next morning, Wednesday, Martin Ladvenu and another friar were

sent to Joan to prepare her for death; and Manchon and I went with

them--a hard service for me. We tramped through the dim corridors,

winding this way and that, and piercing ever deeper and deeper into that

vast heart of stone, and at last we stood before Joan. But she did not

know it. She sat with her hands in her lap and her head bowed, thinking,

and her face was very sad. One might not know what she was thinking of.

Of her home, and the peaceful pastures, and the friends she was no more

to see? Of her wrongs, and her forsaken estate, and the cruelties which

had been put upon her? Or was it of death--the death which she had longed

for, and which was now so close?



Or was it of the kind of death she must suffer? I hoped not; for she

feared only one kind, and that one had for her unspeakable terrors. I

believed she so feared that one that with her strong will she would shut

the thought of it wholly out of her mind, and hope and believe that God

would take pity on her and grant her an easier one; and so it might

chance that the awful news which we were bringing might come as a

surprise to her at last.



We stood silent awhile, but she was still unconscious of us, still deep

in her sad musings and far away. Then Martin Ladvenu said, softly:



"Joan."



She looked up then, with a little start and a wan smile, and said:



"Speak. Have you a message for me?"



"Yes, my poor child. Try to bear it. Do you think you can bear it?"



"Yes"--very softly, and her head drooped again.



"I am come to prepare you for death."



A faint shiver trembled through her wasted body. There was a pause. In

the stillness we could hear our breathings. Then she said, still in that

low voice:



"When will it be?"



The muffled notes of a tolling bell floated to our ears out of the

distance.



"Now. The time is at hand."



That slight shiver passed again.



"It is so soon--ah, it is so soon!"



There was a long silence. The distant throbbings of the bell pulsed

through it, and we stood motionless and listening. But it was broken at

last:



"What death is it?"



"By fire!"



"Oh, I knew it, I knew it!" She sprang wildly to her feet, and wound her

hands in her hair, and began to writhe and sob, oh, so piteously, and

mourn and grieve and lament, and turn to first one and then another of

us, and search our faces beseechingly, as hoping she might find help and

friendliness there, poor thing--she that had never denied these to any

creature, even her wounded enemy on the battle-field.



"Oh, cruel, cruel, to treat me so! And must my body, that has never been

defiled, be consumed today and turned to ashes? Ah, sooner would I that

my head were cut off seven times than suffer this woeful death. I had the

promise of the Church's prison when I submitted, and if I had but been

there, and not left here in the hands of my enemies, this miserable fate

had not befallen me.



"Oh, I appeal to God the Great Judge, against the injustice which has

been done me."



There was none there that could endure it. They turned away, with the

tears running down their faces. In a moment I was on my knees at her

feet. At once she thought only of my danger, and bent and whispered in my

hear: "Up!--do not peril yourself, good heart. There--God bless you

always!" and I felt the quick clasp of her hand. Mine was the last hand

she touched with hers in life. None saw it; history does not know of it

or tell of it, yet it is true, just as I have told it. The next moment

she saw Cauchon coming, and she went and stood before him and reproached

him, saying:



"Bishop, it is by you that I die!"



He was not shamed, not touched; but said, smoothly:



"Ah, be patient, Joan. You die because you have not kept your promise,

but have returned to your sins."



"Alas," she said, "if you had put me in the Church's prison, and given me

right and proper keepers, as you promised, this would not have happened.

And for this I summon you to answer before God!"



Then Cauchon winced, and looked less placidly content than before, and he

turned him about and went away.



Joan stood awhile musing. She grew calmer, but occasionally she wiped her

eyes, and now and then sobs shook her body; but their violence was

modifying now, and the intervals between them were growing longer.

Finally she looked up and saw Pierre Maurice, who had come in with the

Bishop, and she said to him:



"Master Peter, where shall I be this night?"



"Have you not good hope in God?"



"Yes--and by His grace I shall be in Paradise."



Now Martin Ladvenu heard her in confession; then she begged for the

sacrament. But how grant the communion to one who had been publicly cut

off from the Church, and was now no more entitled to its privileges than

an unbaptized pagan? The brother could not do this, but he sent to

Cauchon to inquire what he must do. All laws, human and divine, were

alike to that man--he respected none of them. He sent back orders to

grant Joan whatever she wished. Her last speech to him had reached his

fears, perhaps; it could not reach his heart, for he had none.



The Eucharist was brought now to that poor soul that had yearned for it

with such unutterable longing all these desolate months. It was a solemn

moment. While we had been in the deeps of the prison, the public courts

of the castle had been filling up with crowds of the humbler sort of men

and women, who had learned what was going on in Joan's cell, and had come

with softened hearts to do--they knew not what; to hear--they knew not

what. We knew nothing of this, for they were out of our view. And there

were other great crowds of the like caste gathered in masses outside the

castle gates. And when the lights and the other accompaniments of the

Sacrament passed by, coming to Joan in the prison, all those multitudes

kneeled down and began to pray for her, and many wept; and when the

solemn ceremony of the communion began in Joan's cell, out of the

distance a moving sound was borne moaning to our ears--it was those

invisible multitudes chanting the litany for a departing soul.



The fear of the fiery death was gone from Joan of Arc now, to come again

no more, except for one fleeting instant--then it would pass, and

serenity and courage would take its place and abide till the end.







  24 Joan the Martyr



AT NINE o'clock the Maid of Orleans, Deliverer of France, went forth in

the grace of her innocence and her youth to lay down her life for the

country she loved with such devotion, and for the King that had abandoned

her. She sat in the cart that is used only for felons. In one respect she

was treated worse than a felon; for whereas she was on her way to be

sentenced by the civil arm, she already bore her judgment inscribed in

advance upon a miter-shaped cap which she wore:



HERETIC, RELAPSED, APOSTATE, IDOLATER



In the cart with her sat the friar Martin Ladvenu and Maetre Jean

Massieu. She looked girlishly fair and sweet and saintly in her long

white robe, and when a gush of sunlight flooded her as she emerged from

the gloom of the prison and was yet for a moment still framed in the arch

of the somber gate, the massed multitudes of poor folk murmured "A

vision! a vision!" and sank to their knees praying, and many of the women

weeping; and the moving invocation for the dying arose again, and was

taken up and borne along, a majestic wave of sound, which accompanied the

doomed, solacing and blessing her, all the sorrowful way to the place of

death. "Christ have pity! Saint Margaret have pity! Pray for her, all ye

saints, archangels, and blessed martyrs, pray for her! Saints and angels

intercede for her! From thy wrath, good Lord, deliver her! O Lord God,

save her! Have mercy on her, we beseech Thee, good Lord!"



It is just and true what one of the histories has said: "The poor and the

helpless had nothing but their prayers to give Joan of Arc; but these we

may believe were not unavailing. There are few more pathetic events

recorded in history than this weeping, helpless, praying crowd, holding

their lighted candles and kneeling on the pavement beneath the prison

walls of the old fortress."



And it was so all the way: thousands upon thousands massed upon their

knees and stretching far down the distances, thick-sown with the faint

yellow candle-flames, like a field starred with golden flowers.



But there were some that did not kneel; these were the English soldiers.

They stood elbow to elbow, on each side of Joan's road, and walled it in

all the way; and behind these living walls knelt the multitudes.



By and by a frantic man in priest's garb came wailing and lamenting, and

tore through the crowd and the barriers of soldiers and flung himself on

his knees by Joan's cart and put up his hands in supplication, crying

out:



"O forgive, forgive!"



It was Loyseleur!



And Joan forgave him; forgave him out of a heart that knew nothing but

forgiveness, nothing but compassion, nothing but pity for all that

suffer, let their offense be what it might. And she had no word of

reproach for this poor wretch who had wrought day and night with deceits

and treacheries and hypocrisies to betray her to her death.



The soldiers would have killed him, but the Earl of Warwick saved his

life. What became of him is not known. He hid himself from the world

somewhere, to endure his remorse as he might.



In the square of the Old Market stood the two platforms and the stake

that had stood before in the churchyard of St. Ouen. The platforms were

occupied as before, the one by Joan and her judges, the other by great

dignitaries, the principal being Cauchon and the English

Cardinal--Winchester. The square was packed with people, the windows and

roofs of the blocks of buildings surrounding it were black with them.



When the preparations had been finished, all noise and movement gradually

ceased, and a waiting stillness followed which was solemn and impressive.



And now, by order of Cauchon, an ecclesiastic named Nicholas Midi

preached a sermon, wherein he explained that when a branch of the

vine--which is the Church--becomes diseased and corrupt, it must be cut

away or it will corrupt and destroy the whole vine. He made it appear

that Joan, through her wickedness, was a menace and a peril to the

Church's purity and holiness, and her death therefore necessary. When he

was come to the end of his discourse he turned toward her and paused a

moment, then he said:



"Joan, the Church can no longer protect you. Go in peace!"



Joan had been placed wholly apart and conspicuous, to signify the

Church's abandonment of her, and she sat there in her loneliness, waiting

in patience and resignation for the end. Cauchon addressed her now. He

had been advised to read the form of her abjuration to her, and had

brought it with him; but he changed his mind, fearing that she would

proclaim the truth--that she had never knowingly abjured--and so bring

shame upon him and eternal infamy. He contented himself with admonishing

her to keep in mind her wickednesses, and repent of them, and think of

her salvation. Then he solemnly pronounced her excommunicate and cut off

from the body of the Church. With a final word he delivered her over to

the secular arm for judgment and sentence.



Joan, weeping, knelt and began to pray. For whom? Herself? Oh, no--for

the King of France. Her voice rose sweet and clear, and penetrated all

hearts with its passionate pathos. She never thought of his treacheries

to her, she never thought of his desertion of her, she never remembered

that it was because he was an ingrate that she was here to die a

miserable death; she remembered only that he was her King, that she was

his loyal and loving subject, and that his enemies had undermined his

cause with evil reports and false charges, and he not by to defend

himself. And so, in the very presence of death, she forgot her own

troubles to implore all in her hearing to be just to him; to believe that

he was good and noble and sincere, and not in any way to blame for any

acts of hers, neither advising them nor urging them, but being wholly

clear and free of all responsibility for them. Then, closing, she begged

in humble and touching words that all here present would pray for her and

would pardon her, both her enemies and such as might look friendly upon

her and feel pity for her in their hearts.



There was hardly one heart there that was not touched--even the English,

even the judges showed it, and there was many a lip that trembled and

many an eye that was blurred with tears; yes, even the English

Cardinal's--that man with a political heart of stone but a human heart of

flesh.



The secular judge who should have delivered judgment and pronounced

sentence was himself so disturbed that he forgot his duty, and Joan went

to her death unsentenced--thus completing with an illegality what had

begun illegally and had so continued to the end. He only said--to the

guards:



"Take her"; and to the executioner, "Do your duty."



Joan asked for a cross. None was able to furnish one. But an English

soldier broke a stick in two and crossed the pieces and tied them

together, and this cross he gave her, moved to it by the good heart that

was in him; and she kissed it and put it in her bosom. Then Isambard de

la Pierre went to the church near by and brought her a consecrated one;

and this one also she kissed, and pressed it to her bosom with rapture,

and then kissed it again and again, covering it with tears and pouring

out her gratitude to God and the saints.



And so, weeping, and with her cross to her lips, she climbed up the cruel

steps to the face of the stake, with the friar Isambard at her side. Then

she was helped up to the top of the pile of wood that was built around

the lower third of the stake and stood upon it with her back against the

stake, and the world gazing up at her breathless. The executioner

ascended to her side and wound chains around her slender body, and so

fastened her to the stake. Then he descended to finish his dreadful

office; and there she remained alone--she that had had so many friends in

the days when she was free, and had been so loved and so dear.



All these things I saw, albeit dimly and blurred with tears; but I could

bear no more. I continued in my place, but what I shall deliver to you

now I got by others' eyes and others' mouths. Tragic sounds there were

that pierced my ears and wounded my heart as I sat there, but it is as I

tell you: the latest image recorded by my eyes in that desolating hour

was Joan of Arc with the grace of her comely youth still unmarred; and

that image, untouched by time or decay, has remained with me all my days.

Now I will go on.



If any thought that now, in that solemn hour when all transgressors

repent and confess, she would revoke her revocation and say her great

deeds had been evil deeds and Satan and his fiends their source, they

erred. No such thought was in her blameless mind. She was not thinking of

herself and her troubles, but of others, and of woes that might befall

them. And so, turning her grieving eyes about her, where rose the towers

and spires of that fair city, she said:



"Oh, Rouen, Rouen, must I die here, and must you be my tomb? Ah, Rouen,

Rouen, I have great fear that you will suffer for my death."



A whiff of smoke swept upward past her face, and for one moment terror

seized her and she cried out, "Water! Give me holy water!" but the next

moment her fears were gone, and they came no more to torture her.



She heard the flames crackling below her, and immediately distress for a

fellow-creature who was in danger took possession of her. It was the

friar Isambard. She had given him her cross and begged him to raise it

toward her face and let her eyes rest in hope and consolation upon it

till she was entered into the peace of God. She made him go out from the

danger of the fire. Then she was satisfied, and said:



"Now keep it always in my sight until the end."



Not even yet could Cauchon, that man without shame, endure to let her die

in peace, but went toward her, all black with crimes and sins as he was,

and cried out:



"I am come, Joan, to exhort you for the last time to repent and seek the

pardon of God."



"I die through you," she said, and these were the last words she spoke to

any upon earth.



Then the pitchy smoke, shot through with red flashes of flame, rolled up

in a thick volume and hid her from sight; and from the heart of this

darkness her voice rose strong and eloquent in prayer, and when by

moments the wind shredded somewhat of the smoke aside, there were veiled

glimpses of an upturned face and moving lips. At last a mercifully swift

tide of flame burst upward, and none saw that face any more nor that

form, and the voice was still.



Yes, she was gone from us: JOAN OF ARC! What little words they are, to

tell of a rich world made empty and poor!







 CONCLUSION



JOAN'S BROTHER Jacques died in Domremy during the Great Trial at Rouen.

This was according to the prophecy which Joan made that day in the

pastures the time that she said the rest of us would go to the great

wars.



When her poor old father heard of the martyrdom it broke his heart, and

he died.



The mother was granted a pension by the city of Orleans, and upon this

she lived out her days, which were many. Twenty-four years after her

illustrious child's death she traveled all the way to Paris in the

winter-time and was present at the opening of the discussion in the

Cathedral of Notre Dame which was the first step in the Rehabilitation.

Paris was crowded with people, from all about France, who came to get

sight of the venerable dame, and it was a touching spectacle when she

moved through these reverent wet-eyed multitudes on her way to the grand

honors awaiting her at the cathedral. With her were Jean and Pierre, no

longer the light-hearted youths who marched with us from Vaucouleurs, but

war-torn veterans with hair beginning to show frost.



After the martyrdom Noel and I went back to Domremy, but presently when

the Constable Richemont superseded La Tremouille as the King's chief

adviser and began the completion of Joan's great work, we put on our

harness and returned to the field and fought for the King all through the

wars and skirmishes until France was freed of the English. It was what

Joan would have desired of us; and, dead or alive, her desire was law for

us. All the survivors of the personal staff were faithful to her memory

and fought for the King to the end. Mainly we were well scattered, but

when Paris fell we happened to be together. It was a great day and a

joyous; but it was a sad one at the same time, because Joan was not there

to march into the captured capital with us.



Noel and I remained always together, and I was by his side when death

claimed him. It was in the last great battle of the war. In that battle

fell also Joan's sturdy old enemy Talbot. He was eighty-five years old,

and had spent his whole life in battle. A fine old lion he was, with his

flowing white mane and his tameless spirit; yes, and his indestructible

energy as well; for he fought as knightly and vigorous a fight that day

as the best man there.



La Hire survived the martyrdom thirteen years; and always fighting, of

course, for that was all he enjoyed in life. I did not see him in all

that time, for we were far apart, but one was always hearing of him.



The Bastard of Orleans and D'Alencon and D'Aulon lived to see France

free, and to testify with Jean and Pierre d'Arc and Pasquerel and me at

the Rehabilitation. But they are all at rest now, these many years. I

alone am left of those who fought at the side of Joan of Arc in the great

wars.



She said I would live until those wars were forgotten--a prophecy which

failed. If I should live a thousand years it would still fail. For

whatsoever had touch with Joan of Arc, that thing is immortal.



Members of Joan's family married, and they have left descendants. Their

descendants are of the nobility, but their family name and blood bring

them honors which no other nobles receive or may hope for. You have seen

how everybody along the way uncovered when those children came yesterday

to pay their duty to me. It was not because they are noble, it is because

they are grandchildren of the brothers of Joan of Arc.



Now as to the Rehabilitation. Joan crowned the King at Rheims. For reward

he allowed her to be hunted to her death without making one effort to

save her. During the next twenty-three years he remained indifferent to

her memory; indifferent to the fact that her good name was under a

damning blot put there by the priest because of the deeds which she had

done in saving him and his scepter; indifferent to the fact that France

was ashamed, and longed to have the Deliverer's fair fame restored.

Indifferent all that time. Then he suddenly changed and was anxious to

have justice for poor Joan himself. Why? Had he become grateful at last?

Had remorse attacked his hard heart? No, he had a better reason--a better

one for his sort of man. This better reason was that, now that the

English had been finally expelled from the country, they were beginning

to call attention to the fact that this King had gotten his crown by the

hands of a person proven by the priests to have been in league with Satan

and burned for it by them as a sorceress--therefore, of what value or

authority was such a Kingship as that? Of no value at all; no nation

could afford to allow such a king to remain on the throne.



It was high time to stir now, and the King did it. That is how Charles

VII. came to be smitten with anxiety to have justice done the memory of

his benefactress.



He appealed to the Pope, and the Pope appointed a great commission of

churchmen to examine into the facts of Joan's life and award judgment.

The Commission sat at Paris, at Domremy, at Rouen, at Orleans, and at

several other places, and continued its work during several months. It

examined the records of Joan's trials, it examined the Bastard of

Orleans, and the Duke d'Alencon, and D'Aulon, and Pasquerel, and

Courcelles, and Isambard de la Pierre, and Manchon, and me, and many

others whose names I have made familiar to you; also they examined more

than a hundred witnesses whose names are less familiar to you--the

friends of Joan in Domremy, Vaucouleurs, Orleans, and other places, and a

number of judges and other people who had assisted at the Rouen trials,

the abjuration, and the martyrdom. And out of this exhaustive examination

Joan's character and history came spotless and perfect, and this verdict

was placed upon record, to remain forever.



I was present upon most of these occasions, and saw again many faces

which I have not seen for a quarter of a century; among them some

well-beloved faces--those of our generals and that of Catherine Boucher

(married, alas!), and also among them certain other faces that filled me

with bitterness--those of Beaupere and Courcelles and a number of their

fellow-fiends. I saw Haumette and Little Mengette--edging along toward

fifty now, and mothers of many children. I saw Noel's father, and the

parents of the Paladin and the Sunflower.



It was beautiful to hear the Duke d'Alencon praise Joan's splendid

capacities as a general, and to hear the Bastard indorse these praises

with his eloquent tongue and then go on and tell how sweet and good Joan

was, and how full of pluck and fire and impetuosity, and mischief, and

mirthfulness, and tenderness, and compassion, and everything that was

pure and fine and noble and lovely. He made her live again before me, and

wrung my heart.



I have finished my story of Joan of Arc, that wonderful child, that

sublime personality, that spirit which in one regard has had no peer and

will have none--this: its purity from all alloy of self-seeking,

self-interest, personal ambition. In it no trace of these motives can be

found, search as you may, and this cannot be said of any other person

whose name appears in profane history.



With Joan of Arc love of country was more than a sentiment--it was a

passion. She was the Genius of Patriotism--she was Patriotism embodied,

concreted, made flesh, and palpable to the touch and visible to the eye.



Love, Mercy, Charity, Fortitude, War, Peace, Poetry, Music--these may be

symbolized as any shall prefer: by figures of either sex and of any age;

but a slender girl in her first young bloom, with the martyr's crown upon

her head, and in her hand the sword that severed her country's

bonds--shall not this, and no other, stand for PATRIOTISM through all the





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc,

Volume 2, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













TOM SAWYER, DETECTIVE







CHAPTER I.  AN INVITATION FOR TOM AND HUCK



[Footnote: Strange as the incidents of this story are, they are not

inventions, but facts--even to the public confession of the accused.  I

take them from an old-time Swedish criminal trial, change the actors, and

transfer the scenes to America.  I have added some details, but only a

couple of them are important ones. -- M. T.]



WELL, it was the next spring after me and Tom Sawyer set our old nigger

Jim free, the time he was chained up for a runaway slave down there on

Tom's uncle Silas's farm in Arkansaw.  The frost was working out of the

ground, and out of the air, too, and it was getting closer and closer

onto barefoot time every day; and next it would be marble time, and next

mumbletypeg, and next tops and hoops, and next kites, and then right away

it would be summer and going in a-swimming. It just makes a boy homesick

to look ahead like that and see how far off summer is. Yes, and it sets

him to sighing and saddening around, and there's something the matter

with him, he don't know what. But anyway, he gets out by himself and

mopes and thinks; and mostly he hunts for a lonesome place high up on the

hill in the edge of the woods, and sets there and looks away off on the

big Mississippi down there a-reaching miles and miles around the points

where the timber looks smoky and dim it's so far off and still, and

everything's so solemn it seems like everybody you've loved is dead and

gone, and you 'most wish you was dead and gone too, and done with it all.



Don't you know what that is? It's spring fever. That is what the name of

it is.  And when you've got it, you want--oh, you don't quite know what

it is you DO want, but it just fairly makes your heart ache, you want it

so! It seems to you that mainly what you want is to get away; get away

from the same old tedious things you're so used to seeing and so tired

of, and set something new. That is the idea; you want to go and be a

wanderer; you want to go wandering far away to strange countries where

everything is mysterious and wonderful and romantic. And if you can't do

that, you'll put up with considerable less; you'll go anywhere you CAN

go, just so as to get away, and be thankful of the chance, too.



Well, me and Tom Sawyer had the spring fever, and had it bad, too; but it

warn't any use to think about Tom trying to get away, because, as he

said, his Aunt Polly wouldn't let him quit school and go traipsing off

somers wasting time; so we was pretty blue.  We was setting on the front

steps one day about sundown talking this way, when out comes his aunt

Polly with a letter in her hand and says:



"Tom, I reckon you've got to pack up and go down to Arkansaw--your aunt

Sally wants you."



I 'most jumped out of my skin for joy.  I reckoned Tom would fly at his

aunt and hug her head off; but if you believe me he set there like a

rock, and never said a word. It made me fit to cry to see him act so

foolish, with such a noble chance as this opening up.  Why, we might lose

it if he didn't speak up and show he was thankful and grateful. But he

set there and studied and studied till I was that distressed I didn't

know what to do; then he says, very ca'm, and I could a shot him for it:



"Well," he says, "I'm right down sorry, Aunt Polly, but I reckon I got to

be excused--for the present."



His aunt Polly was knocked so stupid and so mad at the cold impudence of

it that she couldn't say a word for as much as a half a minute, and this

gave me a chance to nudge Tom and whisper:



"Ain't you got any sense? Sp'iling such a noble chance as this and

throwing it away?"



But he warn't disturbed.  He mumbled back:



"Huck Finn, do you want me to let her SEE how bad I want to go? Why,

she'd begin to doubt, right away, and imagine a lot of sicknesses and

dangers and objections, and first you know she'd take it all back.  You

lemme alone; I reckon I know how to work her."



Now I never would 'a' thought of that.  But he was right. Tom Sawyer was

always right--the levelest head I ever see, and always AT himself and

ready for anything you might spring on him.  By this time his aunt Polly

was all straight again, and she let fly.  She says:



"You'll be excused! YOU will! Well, I never heard the like of it in all

my days! The idea of you talking like that to ME! Now take yourself off

and pack your traps; and if I hear another word out of you about what

you'll be excused from and what you won't, I lay I'LL excuse you--with a

hickory!"



She hit his head a thump with her thimble as we dodged by, and he let on

to be whimpering as we struck for the stairs. Up in his room he hugged

me, he was so out of his head for gladness because he was going

traveling.  And he says:



"Before we get away she'll wish she hadn't let me go, but she won't know

any way to get around it now. After what she's said, her pride won't let

her take it back."



Tom was packed in ten minutes, all except what his aunt and Mary would

finish up for him; then we waited ten more for her to get cooled down and

sweet and gentle again; for Tom said it took her ten minutes to unruffle

in times when half of her feathers was up, but twenty when they was all

up, and this was one of the times when they was all up.  Then we went

down, being in a sweat to know what the letter said.



She was setting there in a brown study, with it laying in her lap.  We

set down, and she says:



"They're in considerable trouble down there, and they think you and

Huck'll be a kind of diversion for them--'comfort,' they say.  Much of

that they'll get out of you and Huck Finn, I reckon.  There's a neighbor

named Brace Dunlap that's been wanting to marry their Benny for three

months, and at last they told him point blank and once for all, he

COULDN'T; so he has soured on them, and they're worried about it. I

reckon he's somebody they think they better be on the good side of, for

they've tried to please him by hiring his no-account brother to help on

the farm when they can't hardly afford it, and don't want him around

anyhow. Who are the Dunlaps?"



"They live about a mile from Uncle Silas's place, Aunt Polly--all the

farmers live about a mile apart down there--and Brace Dunlap is a long

sight richer than any of the others, and owns a whole grist of niggers.

He's a widower, thirty-six years old, without any children, and is proud

of his money and overbearing, and everybody is a little afraid of him.  I

judge he thought he could have any girl he wanted, just for the asking,

and it must have set him back a good deal when he found he couldn't get

Benny.  Why, Benny's only half as old as he is, and just as sweet and

lovely as--well, you've seen her. Poor old Uncle Silas--why, it's

pitiful, him trying to curry favor that way--so hard pushed and poor, and

yet hiring that useless Jubiter Dunlap to please his ornery brother."



"What a name--Jubiter! Where'd he get it?"



"It's only just a nickname.  I reckon they've forgot his real name long

before this.  He's twenty-seven, now, and has had it ever since the first

time he ever went in swimming.  The school teacher seen a round brown

mole the size of a dime on his left leg above his knee, and four little

bits of moles around it, when he was naked, and he said it minded him of

Jubiter and his moons; and the children thought it was funny, and so they

got to calling him Jubiter, and he's Jubiter yet.  He's tall, and lazy,

and sly, and sneaky, and ruther cowardly, too, but kind of good-natured,

and wears long brown hair and no beard, and hasn't got a cent, and Brace

boards him for nothing, and gives him his old clothes to wear, and

despises him. Jubiter is a twin."



"What's t'other twin like?"



"Just exactly like Jubiter--so they say; used to was, anyway, but he

hain't been seen for seven years. He got to robbing when he was nineteen

or twenty, and they jailed him; but he broke jail and got away--up North

here, somers.  They used to hear about him robbing and burglaring now and

then, but that was years ago. He's dead, now.  At least that's what they

say. They don't hear about him any more."



"What was his name?"



"Jake."



There wasn't anything more said for a considerable while; the old lady

was thinking.  At last she says:



"The thing that is mostly worrying your aunt Sally is the tempers that

that man Jubiter gets your uncle into."



Tom was astonished, and so was I. Tom says:



"Tempers? Uncle Silas? Land, you must be joking! I didn't know he HAD any

temper."



"Works him up into perfect rages, your aunt Sally says; says he acts as

if he would really hit the man, sometimes."



"Aunt Polly, it beats anything I ever heard of. Why, he's just as gentle

as mush."



"Well, she's worried, anyway.  Says your uncle Silas is like a changed

man, on account of all this quarreling. And the neighbors talk about it,

and lay all the blame on your uncle, of course, because he's a preacher

and hain't got any business to quarrel.  Your aunt Sally says he hates to

go into the pulpit he's so ashamed; and the people have begun to cool

toward him, and he ain't as popular now as he used to was."



"Well, ain't it strange? Why, Aunt Polly, he was always so good and kind

and moony and absent-minded and chuckle-headed and lovable--why, he was

just an angel! What CAN be the matter of him, do you reckon?"









 CHAPTER II.  JAKE DUNLAP



WE had powerful good luck; because we got a chance in a stern-wheeler

from away North which was bound for one of them bayous or one-horse

rivers away down Louisiana way, and so we could go all the way down the

Upper Mississippi and all the way down the Lower Mississippi to that farm

in Arkansaw without having to change steamboats at St. Louis; not so very

much short of a thousand miles at one pull.



A pretty lonesome boat; there warn't but few passengers, and all old

folks, that set around, wide apart, dozing, and was very quiet.  We was

four days getting out of the "upper river," because we got aground so

much. But it warn't dull--couldn't be for boys that was traveling, of

course.



From the very start me and Tom allowed that there was somebody sick in

the stateroom next to ourn, because the meals was always toted in there

by the waiters. By and by we asked about it--Tom did and the waiter said

it was a man, but he didn't look sick.



"Well, but AIN'T he sick?"



"I don't know; maybe he is, but 'pears to me he's just letting on."



"What makes you think that?"



"Because if he was sick he would pull his clothes off SOME time or

other--don't you reckon he would? Well, this one don't. At least he don't

ever pull off his boots, anyway."



"The mischief he don't! Not even when he goes to bed?"



"No."



It was always nuts for Tom Sawyer--a mystery was.  If you'd lay out a

mystery and a pie before me and him, you wouldn't have to say take your

choice; it was a thing that would regulate itself.  Because in my nature

I have always run to pie, whilst in his nature he has always run to

mystery. People are made different.  And it is the best way. Tom says to

the waiter:



"What's the man's name?"



"Phillips."



"Where'd he come aboard?"



"I think he got aboard at Elexandria, up on the Iowa line."



"What do you reckon he's a-playing?"



"I hain't any notion--I never thought of it."



I says to myself, here's another one that runs to pie.



"Anything peculiar about him?--the way he acts or talks?"



"No--nothing, except he seems so scary, and keeps his doors locked night

and day both, and when you knock he won't let you in till he opens the

door a crack and sees who it is."



"By jimminy, it's int'resting! I'd like to get a look at him.  Say--the

next time you're going in there, don't you reckon you could spread the

door and--"



"No, indeedy! He's always behind it.  He would block that game."



Tom studied over it, and then he says:



"Looky here.  You lend me your apern and let me take him his breakfast in

the morning.  I'll give you a quarter."



The boy was plenty willing enough, if the head steward wouldn't mind.

Tom says that's all right, he reckoned he could fix it with the head

steward; and he done it. He fixed it so as we could both go in with

aperns on and toting vittles.



He didn't sleep much, he was in such a sweat to get in there and find out

the mystery about Phillips; and moreover he done a lot of guessing about

it all night, which warn't no use, for if you are going to find out the

facts of a thing, what's the sense in guessing out what ain't the facts

and wasting ammunition? I didn't lose no sleep.  I wouldn't give a dern

to know what's the matter of Phillips, I says to myself.



Well, in the morning we put on the aperns and got a couple of trays of

truck, and Tom he knocked on the door. The man opened it a crack, and

then he let us in and shut it quick.  By Jackson, when we got a sight of

him, we 'most dropped the trays! and Tom says:



"Why, Jubiter Dunlap, where'd YOU come from?"



Well, the man was astonished, of course; and first off he looked like he

didn't know whether to be scared, or glad, or both, or which, but finally

he settled down to being glad; and then his color come back, though at

first his face had turned pretty white. So we got to talking together

while he et his breakfast. And he says:



"But I aint Jubiter Dunlap.  I'd just as soon tell you who I am, though,

if you'll swear to keep mum, for I ain't no Phillips, either."



Tom says:



"We'll keep mum, but there ain't any need to tell who you are if you

ain't Jubiter Dunlap."



"Why?"



"Because if you ain't him you're t'other twin, Jake. You're the spit'n

image of Jubiter."



"Well, I'm Jake.  But looky here, how do you come to know us Dunlaps?"



Tom told about the adventures we'd had down there at his uncle Silas's

last summer, and when he see that there warn't anything about his

folks--or him either, for that matter--that we didn't know, he opened out

and talked perfectly free and candid.  He never made any bones about his

own case; said he'd been a hard lot, was a hard lot yet, and reckoned

he'd be a hard lot plumb to the end.  He said of course it was a

dangerous life, and--He give a kind of gasp, and set his head like a

person that's listening.  We didn't say anything, and so it was very

still for a second or so, and there warn't no sounds but the screaking of

the woodwork and the chug-chugging of the machinery down below.



Then we got him comfortable again, telling him about his people, and how

Brace's wife had been dead three years, and Brace wanted to marry Benny

and she shook him, and Jubiter was working for Uncle Silas, and him and

Uncle Silas quarreling all the time--and then he let go and laughed.



"Land!" he says, "it's like old times to hear all this tittle-tattle, and

does me good.  It's been seven years and more since I heard any.  How do

they talk about me these days?"



"Who?"



"The farmers--and the family."



"Why, they don't talk about you at all--at least only just a mention,

once in a long time."



"The nation!" he says, surprised; "why is that?"



"Because they think you are dead long ago."



"No! Are you speaking true?--honor bright, now." He jumped up, excited.



"Honor bright.  There ain't anybody thinks you are alive."



"Then I'm saved, I'm saved, sure! I'll go home. They'll hide me and save

my life.  You keep mum. Swear you'll keep mum--swear you'll never, never

tell on me.  Oh, boys, be good to a poor devil that's being hunted day

and night, and dasn't show his face! I've never done you any harm; I'll

never do you any, as God is in the heavens; swear you'll be good to me

and help me save my life."



We'd a swore it if he'd been a dog; and so we done it. Well, he couldn't

love us enough for it or be grateful enough, poor cuss; it was all he

could do to keep from hugging us.



We talked along, and he got out a little hand-bag and begun to open it,

and told us to turn our backs.  We done it, and when he told us to turn

again he was perfectly different to what he was before.  He had on blue

goggles and the naturalest-looking long brown whiskers and mustashes you

ever see.  His own mother wouldn't 'a' knowed him. He asked us if he

looked like his brother Jubiter, now.



"No," Tom said; "there ain't anything left that's like him except the

long hair."



"All right, I'll get that cropped close to my head before I get there;

then him and Brace will keep my secret, and I'll live with them as being

a stranger, and the neighbors won't ever guess me out.  What do you

think?"



Tom he studied awhile, then he says:



"Well, of course me and Huck are going to keep mum there, but if you

don't keep mum yourself there's going to be a little bit of a risk--it

ain't much, maybe, but it's a little. I mean, if you talk, won't people

notice that your voice is just like Jubiter's; and mightn't it make them

think of the twin they reckoned was dead, but maybe after all was hid all

this time under another name?"



"By George," he says, "you're a sharp one! You're perfectly right.  I've

got to play deef and dumb when there's a neighbor around.  If I'd a

struck for home and forgot that little detail--However, I wasn't striking

for home. I was breaking for any place where I could get away from these

fellows that are after me; then I was going to put on this disguise and

get some different clothes, and--"



He jumped for the outside door and laid his ear against it and listened,

pale and kind of panting.  Presently he whispers:



"Sounded like cocking a gun! Lord, what a life to lead!"



Then he sunk down in a chair all limp and sick like, and wiped the sweat

off of his face.









 CHAPTER III.  A DIAMOND ROBBERY



FROM that time out, we was with him 'most all the time, and one or

t'other of us slept in his upper berth.  He said he had been so lonesome,

and it was such a comfort to him to have company, and somebody to talk to

in his troubles. We was in a sweat to find out what his secret was, but

Tom said the best way was not to seem anxious, then likely he would drop

into it himself in one of his talks, but if we got to asking questions he

would get suspicious and shet up his shell.  It turned out just so. It

warn't no trouble to see that he WANTED to talk about it, but always

along at first he would scare away from it when he got on the very edge

of it, and go to talking about something else.  The way it come about was

this: He got to asking us, kind of indifferent like, about the passengers

down on deck.  We told him about them. But he warn't satisfied; we warn't

particular enough. He told us to describe them better.  Tom done it. At

last, when Tom was describing one of the roughest and raggedest ones, he

gave a shiver and a gasp and says:



"Oh, lordy, that's one of them! They're aboard sure--I just knowed it.

I sort of hoped I had got away, but I never believed it.  Go on."



Presently when Tom was describing another mangy, rough deck passenger, he

give that shiver again and says:



"That's him!--that's the other one.  If it would only come a good black

stormy night and I could get ashore. You see, they've got spies on me.

They've got a right to come up and buy drinks at the bar yonder forrard,

and they take that chance to bribe somebody to keep watch on me--porter

or boots or somebody.  If I was to slip ashore without anybody seeing me,

they would know it inside of an hour."



So then he got to wandering along, and pretty soon, sure enough, he was

telling! He was poking along through his ups and downs, and when he come

to that place he went right along.  He says:



"It was a confidence game.  We played it on a julery-shop in St. Louis.

What we was after was a couple of noble big di'monds as big as

hazel-nuts, which everybody was running to see.  We was dressed up fine,

and we played it on them in broad daylight.  We ordered the di'monds sent

to the hotel for us to see if we wanted to buy, and when we was examining

them we had paste counterfeits all ready, and THEM was the things that

went back to the shop when we said the water wasn't quite fine enough for

twelve thousand dollars."



"Twelve-thousand-dollars!" Tom says.  "Was they really worth all that

money, do you reckon?"



"Every cent of it."



"And you fellows got away with them?"



"As easy as nothing.  I don't reckon the julery people know they've been

robbed yet.  But it wouldn't be good sense to stay around St. Louis, of

course, so we considered where we'd go.  One was for going one way, one

another, so we throwed up, heads or tails, and the Upper Mississippi won.

We done up the di'monds in a paper and put our names on it and put it in

the keep of the hotel clerk, and told him not to ever let either of us

have it again without the others was on hand to see it done; then we went

down town, each by his own self--because I reckon maybe we all had the

same notion.  I don't know for certain, but I reckon maybe we had."



"What notion?" Tom says.



"To rob the others."



"What--one take everything, after all of you had helped to get it?"



"Cert'nly."



It disgusted Tom Sawyer, and he said it was the orneriest, low-downest

thing he ever heard of.  But Jake Dunlap said it warn't unusual in the

profession.  Said when a person was in that line of business he'd got to

look out for his own intrust, there warn't nobody else going to do it for

him. And then he went on.  He says:



"You see, the trouble was, you couldn't divide up two di'monds amongst

three.  If there'd been three--But never mind about that, there warn't

three.  I loafed along the back streets studying and studying.  And I

says to myself, I'll hog them di'monds the first chance I get, and I'll

have a disguise all ready, and I'll give the boys the slip, and when I'm

safe away I'll put it on, and then let them find me if they can.  So I

got the false whiskers and the goggles and this countrified suit of

clothes, and fetched them along back in a hand-bag; and when I was

passing a shop where they sell all sorts of things, I got a glimpse of

one of my pals through the window. It was Bud Dixon.  I was glad, you

bet.  I says to myself, I'll see what he buys.  So I kept shady, and

watched. Now what do you reckon it was he bought?"



"Whiskers?" said I.



"No."



"Goggles?"



"No."



"Oh, keep still, Huck Finn, can't you, you're only just hendering all you

can.  What WAS it he bought, Jake?"



"You'd never guess in the world.  It was only just a screwdriver--just a

wee little bit of a screwdriver."



"Well, I declare! What did he want with that?"



"That's what I thought.  It was curious.  It clean stumped me. I says to

myself, what can he want with that thing? Well, when he come out I stood

back out of sight, and then tracked him to a second-hand slop-shop and

see him buy a red flannel shirt and some old ragged clothes--just the

ones he's got on now, as you've described. Then I went down to the wharf

and hid my things aboard the up-river boat that we had picked out, and

then started back and had another streak of luck.  I seen our other pal

lay in HIS stock of old rusty second-handers. We got the di'monds and

went aboard the boat.



"But now we was up a stump, for we couldn't go to bed. We had to set up

and watch one another.  Pity, that was; pity to put that kind of a strain

on us, because there was bad blood between us from a couple of weeks

back, and we was only friends in the way of business. Bad anyway, seeing

there was only two di'monds betwixt three men.  First we had supper, and

then tramped up and down the deck together smoking till most midnight;

then we went and set down in my stateroom and locked the doors and looked

in the piece of paper to see if the di'monds was all right, then laid it

on the lower berth right in full sight; and there we set, and set, and

by-and-by it got to be dreadful hard to keep awake. At last Bud Dixon he

dropped off.  As soon as he was snoring a good regular gait that was

likely to last, and had his chin on his breast and looked permanent, Hal

Clayton nodded towards the di'monds and then towards the outside door,

and I understood.  I reached and got the paper, and then we stood up and

waited perfectly still; Bud never stirred; I turned the key of the

outside door very soft and slow, then turned the knob the same way, and

we went tiptoeing out onto the guard, and shut the door very soft and

gentle.



"There warn't nobody stirring anywhere, and the boat was slipping along,

swift and steady, through the big water in the smoky moonlight.  We never

said a word, but went straight up onto the hurricane-deck and plumb back

aft, and set down on the end of the sky-light. Both of us knowed what

that meant, without having to explain to one another.  Bud Dixon would

wake up and miss the swag, and would come straight for us, for he ain't

afeard of anything or anybody, that man ain't. He would come, and we

would heave him overboard, or get killed trying. It made me shiver,

because I ain't as brave as some people, but if I showed the white

feather--well, I knowed better than do that.  I kind of hoped the boat

would land somers, and we could skip ashore and not have to run the risk

of this row, I was so scared of Bud Dixon, but she was an upper-river tub

and there warn't no real chance of that.



"Well, the time strung along and along, and that fellow never come! Why,

it strung along till dawn begun to break, and still he never come.

'Thunder,' I says, 'what do you make out of this?--ain't it suspicious?'

'Land!' Hal says, 'do you reckon he's playing us?--open the paper!' I

done it, and by gracious there warn't anything in it but a couple of

little pieces of loaf-sugar! THAT'S the reason he could set there and

snooze all night so comfortable.  Smart? Well, I reckon! He had had them

two papers all fixed and ready, and he had put one of them in place of

t'other right under our noses.



"We felt pretty cheap.  But the thing to do, straight off, was to make a

plan; and we done it.  We would do up the paper again, just as it was,

and slip in, very elaborate and soft, and lay it on the bunk again, and

let on WE didn't know about any trick, and hadn't any idea he was

a-laughing at us behind them bogus snores of his'n; and we would stick by

him, and the first night we was ashore we would get him drunk and search

him, and get the di'monds; and DO for him, too, if it warn't too risky.

If we got the swag, we'd GOT to do for him, or he would hunt us down and

do for us, sure.  But I didn't have no real hope. I knowed we could get

him drunk--he was always ready for that--but what's the good of it? You

might search him a year and never find--Well, right there I catched my

breath and broke off my thought! For an idea went ripping through my head

that tore my brains to rags--and land, but I felt gay and good! You see,

I had had my boots off, to unswell my feet, and just then I took up one

of them to put it on, and I catched a glimpse of the heel-bottom, and it

just took my breath away.  You remember about that puzzlesome little

screwdriver?"



"You bet I do," says Tom, all excited.



"Well, when I catched that glimpse of that boot heel, the idea that went

smashing through my head was, I know where he's hid the di'monds! You

look at this boot heel, now.  See, it's bottomed with a steel plate, and

the plate is fastened on with little screws. Now there wasn't a screw

about that feller anywhere but in his boot heels; so, if he needed a

screwdriver, I reckoned I knowed why."



"Huck, ain't it bully!" says Tom.



"Well, I got my boots on, and we went down and slipped in and laid the

paper of sugar on the berth, and sat down soft and sheepish and went to

listening to Bud Dixon snore.  Hal Clayton dropped off pretty soon, but I

didn't; I wasn't ever so wide awake in my life. I was spying out from

under the shade of my hat brim, searching the floor for leather.  It took

me a long time, and I begun to think maybe my guess was wrong, but at

last I struck it.  It laid over by the bulkhead, and was nearly the color

of the carpet.  It was a little round plug about as thick as the end of

your little finger, and I says to myself there's a di'mond in the nest

you've come from.  Before long I spied out the plug's mate.



"Think of the smartness and coolness of that blatherskite! He put up that

scheme on us and reasoned out what we would do, and we went ahead and

done it perfectly exact, like a couple of pudd'nheads. He set there and

took his own time to unscrew his heelplates and cut out his plugs and

stick in the di'monds and screw on his plates again. He allowed we would

steal the bogus swag and wait all night for him to come up and get

drownded, and by George it's just what we done! I think it was powerful

smart."



"You bet your life it was!" says Tom, just full of admiration.









 CHAPTER IV.  THE THREE SLEEPERS



WELL, all day we went through the humbug of watching one another, and it

was pretty sickly business for two of us and hard to act out, I can tell

you. About night we landed at one of them little Missouri towns high up

toward Iowa, and had supper at the tavern, and got a room upstairs with a

cot and a double bed in it, but I dumped my bag under a deal table in the

dark hall while we was moving along it to bed, single file, me last, and

the landlord in the lead with a tallow candle. We had up a lot of whisky,

and went to playing high-low-jack for dimes, and as soon as the whisky

begun to take hold of Bud we stopped drinking, but we didn't let him

stop. We loaded him till he fell out of his chair and laid there snoring.



"We was ready for business now.  I said we better pull our boots off, and

his'n too, and not make any noise, then we could pull him and haul him

around and ransack him without any trouble.  So we done it.  I set my

boots and Bud's side by side, where they'd be handy. Then we stripped him

and searched his seams and his pockets and his socks and the inside of

his boots, and everything, and searched his bundle.  Never found any

di'monds. We found the screwdriver, and Hal says, 'What do you reckon he

wanted with that?' I said I didn't know; but when he wasn't looking I

hooked it. At last Hal he looked beat and discouraged, and said we'd got

to give it up.  That was what I was waiting for. I says:



"'There's one place we hain't searched.'



"'What place is that?' he says.



"'His stomach.'



"'By gracious, I never thought of that! NOW we're on the homestretch, to

a dead moral certainty.  How'll we manage?'



"'Well,' I says, 'just stay by him till I turn out and hunt up a drug

store, and I reckon I'll fetch something that'll make them di'monds tired

of the company they're keeping.'



"He said that's the ticket, and with him looking straight at me I slid

myself into Bud's boots instead of my own, and he never noticed.  They

was just a shade large for me, but that was considerable better than

being too small. I got my bag as I went a-groping through the hall, and

in about a minute I was out the back way and stretching up the river road

at a five-mile gait.



"And not feeling so very bad, neither--walking on di'monds don't have no

such effect.  When I had gone fifteen minutes I says to myself, there's

more'n a mile behind me, and everything quiet.  Another five minutes and

I says there's considerable more land behind me now, and there's a man

back there that's begun to wonder what's the trouble. Another five and I

says to myself he's getting real uneasy--he's walking the floor now.

Another five, and I says to myself, there's two mile and a half behind

me, and he's AWFUL uneasy--beginning to cuss, I reckon. Pretty soon I

says to myself, forty minutes gone--he KNOWS there's something up! Fifty

minutes--the truth's a-busting on him now! he is reckoning I found the

di'monds whilst we was searching, and shoved them in my pocket and never

let on--yes, and he's starting out to hunt for me. He'll hunt for new

tracks in the dust, and they'll as likely send him down the river as up.



"Just then I see a man coming down on a mule, and before I thought I

jumped into the bush.  It was stupid! When he got abreast he stopped and

waited a little for me to come out; then he rode on again.  But I didn't

feel gay any more. I says to myself I've botched my chances by that; I

surely have, if he meets up with Hal Clayton.



"Well, about three in the morning I fetched Elexandria and see this

stern-wheeler laying there, and was very glad, because I felt perfectly

safe, now, you know.  It was just daybreak.  I went aboard and got this

stateroom and put on these clothes and went up in the pilot-house--to

watch, though I didn't reckon there was any need of it. I set there and

played with my di'monds and waited and waited for the boat to start, but

she didn't. You see, they was mending her machinery, but I didn't know

anything about it, not being very much used to steamboats.



"Well, to cut the tale short, we never left there till plumb noon; and

long before that I was hid in this stateroom; for before breakfast I see

a man coming, away off, that had a gait like Hal Clayton's, and it made

me just sick. I says to myself, if he finds out I'm aboard this boat,

he's got me like a rat in a trap.  All he's got to do is to have me

watched, and wait--wait till I slip ashore, thinking he is a thousand

miles away, then slip after me and dog me to a good place and make me

give up the di'monds, and then he'll--oh, I know what he'll do! Ain't it

awful--awful! And now to think the OTHER one's aboard, too! Oh, ain't it

hard luck, boys--ain't it hard! But you'll help save me, WON'T you?--oh,

boys, be good to a poor devil that's being hunted to death, and save

me--I'll worship the very ground you walk on!"



We turned in and soothed him down and told him we would plan for him and

help him, and he needn't be so afeard; and so by and by he got to feeling

kind of comfortable again, and unscrewed his heelplates and held up his

di'monds this way and that, admiring them and loving them; and when the

light struck into them they WAS beautiful, sure; why, they seemed to kind

of bust, and snap fire out all around.  But all the same I judged he was

a fool. If I had been him I would a handed the di'monds to them pals and

got them to go ashore and leave me alone. But he was made different.  He

said it was a whole fortune and he couldn't bear the idea.



Twice we stopped to fix the machinery and laid a good while, once in the

night; but it wasn't dark enough, and he was afeard to skip.  But the

third time we had to fix it there was a better chance.  We laid up at a

country woodyard about forty mile above Uncle Silas's place a little

after one at night, and it was thickening up and going to storm. So Jake

he laid for a chance to slide.  We begun to take in wood.  Pretty soon

the rain come a-drenching down, and the wind blowed hard.  Of course

every boat-hand fixed a gunny sack and put it on like a bonnet, the way

they do when they are toting wood, and we got one for Jake, and he

slipped down aft with his hand-bag and come tramping forrard just like

the rest, and walked ashore with them, and when we see him pass out of

the light of the torch-basket and get swallowed up in the dark, we got

our breath again and just felt grateful and splendid. But it wasn't for

long.  Somebody told, I reckon; for in about eight or ten minutes them

two pals come tearing forrard as tight as they could jump and darted

ashore and was gone.  We waited plumb till dawn for them to come back,

and kept hoping they would, but they never did. We was awful sorry and

low-spirited. All the hope we had was that Jake had got such a start that

they couldn't get on his track, and he would get to his brother's and

hide there and be safe.



He was going to take the river road, and told us to find out if Brace and

Jubiter was to home and no strangers there, and then slip out about

sundown and tell him.  Said he would wait for us in a little bunch of

sycamores right back of Tom's uncle Silas's tobacker field on the river

road, a lonesome place.



We set and talked a long time about his chances, and Tom said he was all

right if the pals struck up the river instead of down, but it wasn't

likely, because maybe they knowed where he was from; more likely they

would go right, and dog him all day, him not suspecting, and kill him

when it come dark, and take the boots. So we was pretty sorrowful.









 CHAPTER V. A TRAGEDY IN THE WOODS



WE didn't get done tinkering the machinery till away late in the

afternoon, and so it was so close to sundown when we got home that we

never stopped on our road, but made a break for the sycamores as tight as

we could go, to tell Jake what the delay was, and have him wait till we

could go to Brace's and find out how things was there. It was getting

pretty dim by the time we turned the corner of the woods, sweating and

panting with that long run, and see the sycamores thirty yards ahead of

us; and just then we see a couple of men run into the bunch and heard two

or three terrible screams for help. "Poor Jake is killed, sure," we says.

We was scared through and through, and broke for the tobacker field and

hid there, trembling so our clothes would hardly stay on; and just as we

skipped in there, a couple of men went tearing by, and into the bunch

they went, and in a second out jumps four men and took out up the road as

tight as they could go, two chasing two.



We laid down, kind of weak and sick, and listened for more sounds, but

didn't hear none for a good while but just our hearts.  We was thinking

of that awful thing laying yonder in the sycamores, and it seemed like

being that close to a ghost, and it give me the cold shudders. The moon

come a-swelling up out of the ground, now, powerful big and round and

bright, behind a comb of trees, like a face looking through prison bars,

and the black shadders and white places begun to creep around, and it was

miserable quiet and still and night-breezy and graveyardy and scary.  All

of a sudden Tom whispers:



"Look!--what's that?"



"Don't!" I says.  "Don't take a person by surprise that way. I'm 'most

ready to die, anyway, without you doing that."



"Look, I tell you.  It's something coming out of the sycamores."



"Don't, Tom!"



"It's terrible tall!"



"Oh, lordy-lordy! let's--"



"Keep still--it's a-coming this way."



He was so excited he could hardly get breath enough to whisper.  I had to

look.  I couldn't help it. So now we was both on our knees with our chins

on a fence rail and gazing--yes, and gasping too.  It was coming down the

road--coming in the shadder of the trees, and you couldn't see it good;

not till it was pretty close to us; then it stepped into a bright splotch

of moonlight and we sunk right down in our tracks--it was Jake Dunlap's

ghost! That was what we said to ourselves.



We couldn't stir for a minute or two; then it was gone We talked about it

in low voices.  Tom says:



"They're mostly dim and smoky, or like they're made out of fog, but this

one wasn't."



"No," I says; "I seen the goggles and the whiskers perfectly plain."



"Yes, and the very colors in them loud countrified Sunday clothes--plaid

breeches, green and black--"



"Cotton velvet westcot, fire-red and yaller squares--"



"Leather straps to the bottoms of the breeches legs and one of them

hanging unbottoned--"



"Yes, and that hat--"



"What a hat for a ghost to wear!"



You see it was the first season anybody wore that kind--a black

stiff-brim stove-pipe, very high, and not smooth, with a round top--just

like a sugar-loaf.



"Did you notice if its hair was the same, Huck?"



"No--seems to me I did, then again it seems to me I didn't."



"I didn't either; but it had its bag along, I noticed that."



"So did I. How can there be a ghost-bag, Tom?"



"Sho! I wouldn't be as ignorant as that if I was you, Huck Finn.

Whatever a ghost has, turns to ghost-stuff. They've got to have their

things, like anybody else. You see, yourself, that its clothes was turned

to ghost-stuff. Well, then, what's to hender its bag from turning, too?

Of course it done it."



That was reasonable.  I couldn't find no fault with it. Bill Withers and

his brother Jack come along by, talking, and Jack says:



"What do you reckon he was toting?"



"I dunno; but it was pretty heavy."



"Yes, all he could lug.  Nigger stealing corn from old Parson Silas, I

judged."



"So did I. And so I allowed I wouldn't let on to see him."



"That's me, too."



Then they both laughed, and went on out of hearing. It showed how

unpopular old Uncle Silas had got to be now. They wouldn't 'a' let a

nigger steal anybody else's corn and never done anything to him.



We heard some more voices mumbling along towards us and getting louder,

and sometimes a cackle of a laugh. It was Lem Beebe and Jim Lane.  Jim

Lane says:



"Who?--Jubiter Dunlap?"



"Yes."



"Oh, I don't know.  I reckon so.  I seen him spading up some ground along

about an hour ago, just before sundown--him and the parson.  Said he

guessed he wouldn't go to-night, but we could have his dog if we wanted

him."



"Too tired, I reckon."



"Yes--works so hard!"



"Oh, you bet!"



They cackled at that, and went on by.  Tom said we better jump out and

tag along after them, because they was going our way and it wouldn't be

comfortable to run across the ghost all by ourselves.  So we done it, and

got home all right.



That night was the second of September--a Saturday. I sha'n't ever forget

it.  You'll see why, pretty soon.









 CHAPTER VI.  PLANS TO SECURE THE DIAMONDS



WE tramped along behind Jim and Lem till we come to the back stile where

old Jim's cabin was that he was captivated in, the time we set him free,

and here come the dogs piling around us to say howdy, and there was the

lights of the house, too; so we warn't afeard any more, and was going to

climb over, but Tom says:



"Hold on; set down here a minute.  By George!"



"What's the matter?" says I.



"Matter enough!" he says.  "Wasn't you expecting we would be the first to

tell the family who it is that's been killed yonder in the sycamores, and

all about them rapscallions that done it, and about the di'monds they've

smouched off of the corpse, and paint it up fine, and have the glory of

being the ones that knows a lot more about it than anybody else?"



"Why, of course.  It wouldn't be you, Tom Sawyer, if you was to let such

a chance go by.  I reckon it ain't going to suffer none for lack of

paint," I says, "when you start in to scollop the facts."



"Well, now," he says, perfectly ca'm, "what would you say if I was to

tell you I ain't going to start in at all?"



I was astonished to hear him talk so.  I says:



"I'd say it's a lie.  You ain't in earnest, Tom Sawyer?"



"You'll soon see.  Was the ghost barefooted?"



"No, it wasn't. What of it?"



"You wait--I'll show you what.  Did it have its boots on?"



"Yes. I seen them plain."



"Swear it?"



"Yes, I swear it."



"So do I. Now do you know what that means?"



"No. What does it mean?"



"Means that them thieves DIDN'T GET THE DI'MONDS."



"Jimminy! What makes you think that?"



"I don't only think it, I know it.  Didn't the breeches and goggles and

whiskers and hand-bag and every blessed thing turn to ghost-stuff?

Everything it had on turned, didn't it? It shows that the reason its

boots turned too was because it still had them on after it started to go

ha'nting around, and if that ain't proof that them blatherskites didn't

get the boots, I'd like to know what you'd CALL proof."



Think of that now.  I never see such a head as that boy had.  Why, I had

eyes and I could see things, but they never meant nothing to me.  But Tom

Sawyer was different. When Tom Sawyer seen a thing it just got up on its

hind legs and TALKED to him--told him everything it knowed. I never see

such a head.



"Tom Sawyer," I says, "I'll say it again as I've said it a many a time

before: I ain't fitten to black your boots. But that's all right--that's

neither here nor there. God Almighty made us all, and some He gives eyes

that's blind, and some He gives eyes that can see, and I reckon it ain't

none of our lookout what He done it for; it's all right, or He'd 'a'

fixed it some other way. Go on--I see plenty plain enough, now, that them

thieves didn't get way with the di'monds. Why didn't they, do you

reckon?"



"Because they got chased away by them other two men before they could

pull the boots off of the corpse."



"That's so! I see it now.  But looky here, Tom, why ain't we to go and

tell about it?"



"Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, can't you see? Look at it. What's a-going to

happen? There's going to be an inquest in the morning.  Them two men will

tell how they heard the yells and rushed there just in time to not save

the stranger.  Then the jury'll twaddle and twaddle and twaddle, and

finally they'll fetch in a verdict that he got shot or stuck or busted

over the head with something, and come to his death by the inspiration of

God. And after they've buried him they'll auction off his things for to

pay the expenses, and then's OUR chance." "How, Tom?"



"Buy the boots for two dollars!"



Well, it 'most took my breath.



"My land! Why, Tom, WE'LL get the di'monds!"



"You bet.  Some day there'll be a big reward offered for them--a thousand

dollars, sure.  That's our money! Now we'll trot in and see the folks.

And mind you we don't know anything about any murder, or any di'monds, or

any thieves--don't you forget that."



I had to sigh a little over the way he had got it fixed. I'd 'a' SOLD

them di'monds--yes, sir--for twelve thousand dollars; but I didn't say

anything.  It wouldn't done any good.  I says:



"But what are we going to tell your aunt Sally has made us so long

getting down here from the village, Tom?"



"Oh, I'll leave that to you," he says.  "I reckon you can explain it

somehow."



He was always just that strict and delicate.  He never would tell a lie

himself.



We struck across the big yard, noticing this, that, and t'other thing

that was so familiar, and we so glad to see it again, and when we got to

the roofed big passageway betwixt the double log house and the kitchen

part, there was everything hanging on the wall just as it used to was,

even to Uncle Silas's old faded green baize working-gown with the hood to

it, and raggedy white patch between the shoulders that always looked like

somebody had hit him with a snowball; and then we lifted the latch and

walked in. Aunt Sally she was just a-ripping and a-tearing around, and

the children was huddled in one corner, and the old man he was huddled in

the other and praying for help in time of need.  She jumped for us with

joy and tears running down her face and give us a whacking box on the

ear, and then hugged us and kissed us and boxed us again, and just

couldn't seem to get enough of it, she was so glad to see us; and she

says:



"Where HAVE you been a-loafing to, you good-for-nothing trash! I've been

that worried about you I didn't know what to do.  Your traps has been

here ever so long, and I've had supper cooked fresh about four times so

as to have it hot and good when you come, till at last my patience is

just plumb wore out, and I declare I--I--why I could skin you alive! You

must be starving, poor things!--set down, set down, everybody; don't lose

no more time."



It was good to be there again behind all that noble corn-pone and

spareribs, and everything that you could ever want in this world.  Old

Uncle Silas he peeled off one of his bulliest old-time blessings, with as

many layers to it as an onion, and whilst the angels was hauling in the

slack of it I was trying to study up what to say about what kept us so

long.  When our plates was all loadened and we'd got a-going, she asked

me, and I says:



"Well, you see,--er--Mizzes--"



"Huck Finn! Since when am I Mizzes to you? Have I ever been stingy of

cuffs or kisses for you since the day you stood in this room and I took

you for Tom Sawyer and blessed God for sending you to me, though you told

me four thousand lies and I believed every one of them like a simpleton?

Call me Aunt Sally--like you always done."



So I done it.  And I says:



"Well, me and Tom allowed we would come along afoot and take a smell of

the woods, and we run across Lem Beebe and Jim Lane, and they asked us to

go with them blackberrying to-night, and said they could borrow Jubiter

Dunlap's dog, because he had told them just that minute--"



"Where did they see him?" says the old man; and when I looked up to see

how HE come to take an intrust in a little thing like that, his eyes was

just burning into me, he was that eager.  It surprised me so it kind of

throwed me off, but I pulled myself together again and says:



"It was when he was spading up some ground along with you, towards

sundown or along there."



He only said, "Um," in a kind of a disappointed way, and didn't take no

more intrust.  So I went on. I says:



"Well, then, as I was a-saying--"



"That'll do, you needn't go no furder." It was Aunt Sally. She was boring

right into me with her eyes, and very indignant. "Huck Finn," she says,

"how'd them men come to talk about going a-black-berrying in

September--in THIS region?"



I see I had slipped up, and I couldn't say a word. She waited, still

a-gazing at me, then she says:



"And how'd they come to strike that idiot idea of going a-blackberrying

in the night?"



"Well, m'm, they--er--they told us they had a lantern, and--"



"Oh, SHET up--do! Looky here; what was they going to do with a dog?--hunt

blackberries with it?"



"I think, m'm, they--"



"Now, Tom Sawyer, what kind of a lie are you fixing YOUR mouth to

contribit to this mess of rubbage? Speak out--and I warn you before you

begin, that I don't believe a word of it.  You and Huck's been up to

something you no business to--I know it perfectly well; I know you, BOTH

of you. Now you explain that dog, and them blackberries, and the lantern,

and the rest of that rot--and mind you talk as straight as a string--do

you hear?"



Tom he looked considerable hurt, and says, very dignified:



"It is a pity if Huck is to be talked to that way, just for making a

little bit of a mistake that anybody could make."



"What mistake has he made?"



"Why, only the mistake of saying blackberries when of course he meant

strawberries."



"Tom Sawyer, I lay if you aggravate me a little more, I'll--"



"Aunt Sally, without knowing it--and of course without intending it--you

are in the wrong.  If you'd 'a' studied natural history the way you

ought, you would know that all over the world except just here in

Arkansaw they ALWAYS hunt strawberries with a dog--and a lantern--"



But she busted in on him there and just piled into him and snowed him

under.  She was so mad she couldn't get the words out fast enough, and

she gushed them out in one everlasting freshet.  That was what Tom Sawyer

was after.  He allowed to work her up and get her started and then leave

her alone and let her burn herself out. Then she would be so aggravated

with that subject that she wouldn't say another word about it, nor let

anybody else.  Well, it happened just so.  When she was tuckered out and

had to hold up, he says, quite ca'm:



"And yet, all the same, Aunt Sally--"



"Shet up!" she says, "I don't want to hear another word out of you."



So we was perfectly safe, then, and didn't have no more trouble about

that delay.  Tom done it elegant.









 CHAPTER VII.  A NIGHT'S VIGIL



BENNY she was looking pretty sober, and she sighed some, now and then;

but pretty soon she got to asking about Mary, and Sid, and Tom's aunt

Polly, and then Aunt Sally's clouds cleared off and she got in a good

humor and joined in on the questions and was her lovingest best self, and

so the rest of the supper went along gay and pleasant. But the old man he

didn't take any hand hardly, and was absent-minded and restless, and done

a considerable amount of sighing; and it was kind of heart-breaking to

see him so sad and troubled and worried.



By and by, a spell after supper, come a nigger and knocked on the door

and put his head in with his old straw hat in his hand bowing and

scraping, and said his Marse Brace was out at the stile and wanted his

brother, and was getting tired waiting supper for him, and would Marse

Silas please tell him where he was? I never see Uncle Silas speak up so

sharp and fractious before. He says:



"Am I his brother's keeper?" And then he kind of wilted together, and

looked like he wished he hadn't spoken so, and then he says, very gentle:

"But you needn't say that, Billy; I was took sudden and irritable, and I

ain't very well these days, and not hardly responsible. Tell him he ain't

here."



And when the nigger was gone he got up and walked the floor, backwards

and forwards, mumbling and muttering to himself and plowing his hands

through his hair.  It was real pitiful to see him.  Aunt Sally she

whispered to us and told us not to take notice of him, it embarrassed

him. She said he was always thinking and thinking, since these troubles

come on, and she allowed he didn't more'n about half know what he was

about when the thinking spells was on him; and she said he walked in his

sleep considerable more now than he used to, and sometimes wandered

around over the house and even outdoors in his sleep, and if we catched

him at it we must let him alone and not disturb him.  She said she

reckoned it didn't do him no harm, and may be it done him good.  She said

Benny was the only one that was much help to him these days. Said Benny

appeared to know just when to try to soothe him and when to leave him

alone.



So he kept on tramping up and down the floor and muttering, till by and

by he begun to look pretty tired; then Benny she went and snuggled up to

his side and put one hand in his and one arm around his waist and walked

with him; and he smiled down on her, and reached down and kissed her; and

so, little by little the trouble went out of his face and she persuaded

him off to his room.  They had very petting ways together, and it was

uncommon pretty to see.



Aunt Sally she was busy getting the children ready for bed; so by and by

it got dull and tedious, and me and Tom took a turn in the moonlight, and

fetched up in the watermelon-patch and et one, and had a good deal of

talk. And Tom said he'd bet the quarreling was all Jubiter's fault, and

he was going to be on hand the first time he got a chance, and see; and

if it was so, he was going to do his level best to get Uncle Silas to

turn him off.



And so we talked and smoked and stuffed watermelons much as two hours,

and then it was pretty late, and when we got back the house was quiet and

dark, and everybody gone to bed.



Tom he always seen everything, and now he see that the old green baize

work-gown was gone, and said it wasn't gone when he went out; so he

allowed it was curious, and then we went up to bed.



We could hear Benny stirring around in her room, which was next to ourn,

and judged she was worried a good deal about her father and couldn't

sleep. We found we couldn't, neither.  So we set up a long time, and

smoked and talked in a low voice, and felt pretty dull and down-hearted.

We talked the murder and the ghost over and over again, and got so creepy

and crawly we couldn't get sleepy nohow and noway.



By and by, when it was away late in the night and all the sounds was late

sounds and solemn, Tom nudged me and whispers to me to look, and I done

it, and there we see a man poking around in the yard like he didn't know

just what he wanted to do, but it was pretty dim and we couldn't see him

good.  Then he started for the stile, and as he went over it the moon

came out strong, and he had a long-handled shovel over his shoulder, and

we see the white patch on the old work-gown. So Tom says:



"He's a-walking in his sleep.  I wish we was allowed to follow him and

see where he's going to.  There, he's turned down by the tobacker-field.

Out of sight now. It's a dreadful pity he can't rest no better."



We waited a long time, but he didn't come back any more, or if he did he

come around the other way; so at last we was tuckered out and went to

sleep and had nightmares, a million of them.  But before dawn we was

awake again, because meantime a storm had come up and been raging, and

the thunder and lightning was awful, and the wind was a-thrashing the

trees around, and the rain was driving down in slanting sheets, and the

gullies was running rivers. Tom says:



"Looky here, Huck, I'll tell you one thing that's mighty curious.  Up to

the time we went out last night the family hadn't heard about Jake Dunlap

being murdered. Now the men that chased Hal Clayton and Bud Dixon away

would spread the thing around in a half an hour, and every neighbor that

heard it would shin out and fly around from one farm to t'other and try

to be the first to tell the news.  Land, they don't have such a big thing

as that to tell twice in thirty year! Huck, it's mighty strange; I don't

understand it."



So then he was in a fidget for the rain to let up, so we could turn out

and run across some of the people and see if they would say anything

about it to us. And he said if they did we must be horribly surprised and

shocked.



We was out and gone the minute the rain stopped. It was just broad day

then.  We loafed along up the road, and now and then met a person and

stopped and said howdy, and told them when we come, and how we left the

folks at home, and how long we was going to stay, and all that, but none

of them said a word about that thing; which was just astonishing, and no

mistake.  Tom said he believed if we went to the sycamores we would find

that body laying there solitary and alone, and not a soul around.  Said

he believed the men chased the thieves so far into the woods that the

thieves prob'ly seen a good chance and turned on them at last, and maybe

they all killed each other, and so there wasn't anybody left to tell.



First we knowed, gabbling along that away, we was right at the sycamores.

The cold chills trickled down my back and I wouldn't budge another step,

for all Tom's persuading. But he couldn't hold in; he'd GOT to see if the

boots was safe on that body yet.  So he crope in--and the next minute out

he come again with his eyes bulging he was so excited, and says:



"Huck, it's gone!"



I WAS astonished! I says:



"Tom, you don't mean it."



"It's gone, sure.  There ain't a sign of it.  The ground is trampled

some, but if there was any blood it's all washed away by the storm, for

it's all puddles and slush in there."



At last I give in, and went and took a look myself; and it was just as

Tom said--there wasn't a sign of a corpse.



"Dern it," I says, "the di'monds is gone.  Don't you reckon the thieves

slunk back and lugged him off, Tom?"



"Looks like it.  It just does.  Now where'd they hide him, do you

reckon?"



"I don't know," I says, disgusted, "and what's more I don't care.

They've got the boots, and that's all I cared about.  He'll lay around

these woods a long time before I hunt him up."



Tom didn't feel no more intrust in him neither, only curiosity to know

what come of him; but he said we'd lay low and keep dark and it wouldn't

be long till the dogs or somebody rousted him out.



We went back home to breakfast ever so bothered and put out and

disappointed and swindled.  I warn't ever so down on a corpse before.









 CHAPTER VIII.  TALKING WITH THE GHOST



IT warn't very cheerful at breakfast.  Aunt Sally she looked old and

tired and let the children snarl and fuss at one another and didn't seem

to notice it was going on, which wasn't her usual style; me and Tom had a

plenty to think about without talking; Benny she looked like she hadn't

had much sleep, and whenever she'd lift her head a little and steal a

look towards her father you could see there was tears in her eyes; and as

for the old man, his things stayed on his plate and got cold without him

knowing they was there, I reckon, for he was thinking and thinking all

the time, and never said a word and never et a bite.



By and by when it was stillest, that nigger's head was poked in at the

door again, and he said his Marse Brace was getting powerful uneasy about

Marse Jubiter, which hadn't come home yet, and would Marse Silas please

--He was looking at Uncle Silas, and he stopped there, like the rest of

his words was froze; for Uncle Silas he rose up shaky and steadied

himself leaning his fingers on the table, and he was panting, and his

eyes was set on the nigger, and he kept swallowing, and put his other

hand up to his throat a couple of times, and at last he got his words

started, and says:



"Does he--does he--think--WHAT does he think! Tell him--tell him--" Then

he sunk down in his chair limp and weak, and says, so as you could hardly

hear him: "Go away--go away!"



The nigger looked scared and cleared out, and we all felt--well, I don't

know how we felt, but it was awful, with the old man panting there, and

his eyes set and looking like a person that was dying.  None of us could

budge; but Benny she slid around soft, with her tears running down, and

stood by his side, and nestled his old gray head up against her and begun

to stroke it and pet it with her hands, and nodded to us to go away, and

we done it, going out very quiet, like the dead was there.



Me and Tom struck out for the woods mighty solemn, and saying how

different it was now to what it was last summer when we was here and

everything was so peaceful and happy and everybody thought so much of

Uncle Silas, and he was so cheerful and simple-hearted and pudd'n-headed

and good--and now look at him.  If he hadn't lost his mind he wasn't muck

short of it.  That was what we allowed.



It was a most lovely day now, and bright and sunshiny; and the further

and further we went over the hills towards the prairie the lovelier and

lovelier the trees and flowers got to be and the more it seemed strange

and somehow wrong that there had to be trouble in such a world as this.

And then all of a sudden I catched my breath and grabbed Tom's arm, and

all my livers and lungs and things fell down into my legs.



"There it is!" I says.  We jumped back behind a bush shivering, and Tom

says:



"'Sh!--don't make a noise."



It was setting on a log right in the edge of a little prairie, thinking.

I tried to get Tom to come away, but he wouldn't, and I dasn't budge by

myself.  He said we mightn't ever get another chance to see one, and he

was going to look his fill at this one if he died for it. So I looked

too, though it give me the fan-tods to do it. Tom he HAD to talk, but he

talked low.  He says:



"Poor Jakey, it's got all its things on, just as he said he would.  NOW

you see what we wasn't certain about--its hair. It's not long now the way

it was: it's got it cropped close to its head, the way he said he would.

Huck, I never see anything look any more naturaler than what It does."



"Nor I neither," I says; "I'd recognize it anywheres."



"So would I. It looks perfectly solid and genuwyne, just the way it done

before it died."



So we kept a-gazing. Pretty soon Tom says:



"Huck, there's something mighty curious about this one, don't you know?

IT oughtn't to be going around in the daytime."



"That's so, Tom--I never heard the like of it before."



"No, sir, they don't ever come out only at night--and then not till

after twelve.  There's something wrong about this one, now you mark my

words.  I don't believe it's got any right to be around in the daytime.

But don't it look natural! Jake was going to play deef and dumb here, so

the neighbors wouldn't know his voice. Do you reckon it would do that if

we was to holler at it?"



"Lordy, Tom, don't talk so! If you was to holler at it I'd die in my

tracks."



"Don't you worry, I ain't going to holler at it. Look, Huck, it's

a-scratching its head--don't you see?"



"Well, what of it?"



"Why, this.  What's the sense of it scratching its head? There ain't

anything there to itch; its head is made out of fog or something like

that, and can't itch. A fog can't itch; any fool knows that."



"Well, then, if it don't itch and can't itch, what in the nation is it

scratching it for? Ain't it just habit, don't you reckon?"



"No, sir, I don't. I ain't a bit satisfied about the way this one acts.

I've a blame good notion it's a bogus one--I have, as sure as I'm

a-sitting here.  Because, if it--Huck!"



"Well, what's the matter now?"



"YOU CAN'T SEE THE BUSHES THROUGH IT!"



"Why, Tom, it's so, sure! It's as solid as a cow. I sort of begin to

think--"



"Huck, it's biting off a chaw of tobacker! By George, THEY don't

chaw--they hain't got anything to chaw WITH. Huck!"



"I'm a-listening."



"It ain't a ghost at all.  It's Jake Dunlap his own self!"



"Oh your granny!" I says.



"Huck Finn, did we find any corpse in the sycamores?"



"No."



"Or any sign of one?"



"No."



"Mighty good reason.  Hadn't ever been any corpse there."



"Why, Tom, you know we heard--"



"Yes, we did--heard a howl or two.  Does that prove anybody was killed?

Course it don't. And we seen four men run, then this one come walking out

and we took it for a ghost. No more ghost than you are.  It was Jake

Dunlap his own self, and it's Jake Dunlap now.  He's been and got his

hair cropped, the way he said he would, and he's playing himself for a

stranger, just the same as he said he would. Ghost? Hum!--he's as sound

as a nut."



Then I see it all, and how we had took too much for granted. I was

powerful glad he didn't get killed, and so was Tom, and we wondered which

he would like the best--for us to never let on to know him, or how? Tom

reckoned the best way would be to go and ask him.  So he started; but I

kept a little behind, because I didn't know but it might be a ghost,

after all.  When Tom got to where he was, he says:



"Me and Huck's mighty glad to see you again, and you needn't be afeared

we'll tell.  And if you think it'll be safer for you if we don't let on

to know you when we run across you, say the word and you'll see you can

depend on us, and would ruther cut our hands off than get you into the

least little bit of danger."



First off he looked surprised to see us, and not very glad, either; but

as Tom went on he looked pleasanter, and when he was done he smiled, and

nodded his head several times, and made signs with his hands, and says:



"Goo-goo--goo-goo," the way deef and dummies does.



Just then we see some of Steve Nickerson's people coming that lived

t'other side of the prairie, so Tom says:



"You do it elegant; I never see anybody do it better. You're right; play

it on us, too; play it on us same as the others; it'll keep you in

practice and prevent you making blunders.  We'll keep away from you and

let on we don't know you, but any time we can be any help, you just let

us know."



Then we loafed along past the Nickersons, and of course they asked if

that was the new stranger yonder, and where'd he come from, and what was

his name, and which communion was he, Babtis' or Methodis', and which

politics, Whig or Democrat, and how long is he staying, and all them

other questions that humans always asks when a stranger comes, and

animals does, too.  But Tom said he warn't able to make anything out of

deef and dumb signs, and the same with goo-gooing. Then we watched them

go and bullyrag Jake; because we was pretty uneasy for him.  Tom said it

would take him days to get so he wouldn't forget he was a deef and dummy

sometimes, and speak out before he thought. When we had watched long

enough to see that Jake was getting along all right and working his signs

very good, we loafed along again, allowing to strike the schoolhouse

about recess time, which was a three-mile tramp.



I was so disappointed not to hear Jake tell about the row in the

sycamores, and how near he come to getting killed, that I couldn't seem

to get over it, and Tom he felt the same, but said if we was in Jake's

fix we would want to go careful and keep still and not take any chances.



The boys and girls was all glad to see us again, and we had a real good

time all through recess.  Coming to school the Henderson boys had come

across the new deef and dummy and told the rest; so all the scholars was

chuck full of him and couldn't talk about anything else, and was in a

sweat to get a sight of him because they hadn't ever seen a deef and

dummy in their lives, and it made a powerful excitement.



Tom said it was tough to have to keep mum now; said we would be heroes if

we could come out and tell all we knowed; but after all, it was still

more heroic to keep mum, there warn't two boys in a million could do it.

That was Tom Sawyer's idea about it, and reckoned there warn't anybody

could better it.









 CHAPTER IX.  FINDING OF JUBITER DUNLAP



IN the next two or three days Dummy he got to be powerful popular.  He

went associating around with the neighbors, and they made much of him,

and was proud to have such a rattling curiosity among them.  They had him

to breakfast, they had him to dinner, they had him to supper; they kept

him loaded up with hog and hominy, and warn't ever tired staring at him

and wondering over him, and wishing they knowed more about him, he was so

uncommon and romantic. His signs warn't no good; people couldn't

understand them and he prob'ly couldn't himself, but he done a sight of

goo-gooing, and so everybody was satisfied, and admired to hear him go

it.  He toted a piece of slate around, and a pencil; and people wrote

questions on it and he wrote answers; but there warn't anybody could read

his writing but Brace Dunlap.  Brace said he couldn't read it very good,

but he could manage to dig out the meaning most of the time. He said

Dummy said he belonged away off somers and used to be well off, but got

busted by swindlers which he had trusted, and was poor now, and hadn't

any way to make a living.



Everybody praised Brace Dunlap for being so good to that stranger.  He

let him have a little log-cabin all to himself, and had his niggers take

care of it, and fetch him all the vittles he wanted.



Dummy was at our house some, because old Uncle Silas was so afflicted

himself, these days, that anybody else that was afflicted was a comfort

to him.  Me and Tom didn't let on that we had knowed him before, and he

didn't let on that he had knowed us before.  The family talked their

troubles out before him the same as if he wasn't there, but we reckoned

it wasn't any harm for him to hear what they said. Generly he didn't seem

to notice, but sometimes he did.



Well, two or three days went along, and everybody got to getting uneasy

about Jubiter Dunlap.  Everybody was asking everybody if they had any

idea what had become of him. No, they hadn't, they said: and they shook

their heads and said there was something powerful strange about it.

Another and another day went by; then there was a report got around that

praps he was murdered.  You bet it made a big stir! Everybody's tongue

was clacking away after that. Saturday two or three gangs turned out and

hunted the woods to see if they could run across his remainders. Me and

Tom helped, and it was noble good times and exciting. Tom he was so

brimful of it he couldn't eat nor rest. He said if we could find that

corpse we would be celebrated, and more talked about than if we got

drownded.



The others got tired and give it up; but not Tom Sawyer--that warn't his

style.  Saturday night he didn't sleep any, hardly, trying to think up a

plan; and towards daylight in the morning he struck it. He snaked me out

of bed and was all excited, and says:



"Quick, Huck, snatch on your clothes--I've got it! Bloodhound!"



In two minutes we was tearing up the river road in the dark towards the

village.  Old Jeff Hooker had a bloodhound, and Tom was going to borrow

him.  I says:



"The trail's too old, Tom--and besides, it's rained, you know."



"It don't make any difference, Huck.  If the body's hid in the woods

anywhere around the hound will find it. If he's been murdered and buried,

they wouldn't bury him deep, it ain't likely, and if the dog goes over

the spot he'll scent him, sure.  Huck, we're going to be celebrated, sure

as you're born!"



He was just a-blazing; and whenever he got afire he was most likely to

get afire all over.  That was the way this time. In two minutes he had

got it all ciphered out, and wasn't only just going to find the

corpse--no, he was going to get on the track of that murderer and hunt

HIM down, too; and not only that, but he was going to stick to him till

--"Well," I says, "you better find the corpse first; I reckon that's

a-plenty for to-day. For all we know, there AIN'T any corpse and nobody

hain't been murdered. That cuss could 'a' gone off somers and not been

killed at all."



That graveled him, and he says:



"Huck Finn, I never see such a person as you to want to spoil everything.

As long as YOU can't see anything hopeful in a thing, you won't let

anybody else.  What good can it do you to throw cold water on that corpse

and get up that selfish theory that there ain't been any murder? None in

the world.  I don't see how you can act so. I wouldn't treat you like

that, and you know it. Here we've got a noble good opportunity to make a

ruputation, and--"



"Oh, go ahead," I says.  "I'm sorry, and I take it all back. I didn't

mean nothing.  Fix it any way you want it. HE ain't any consequence to

me.  If he's killed, I'm as glad of it as you are; and if he--"



"I never said anything about being glad; I only--"



"Well, then, I'm as SORRY as you are.  Any way you druther have it, that

is the way I druther have it.  He--"



"There ain't any druthers ABOUT it, Huck Finn; nobody said anything about

druthers.  And as for--"



He forgot he was talking, and went tramping along, studying. He begun to

get excited again, and pretty soon he says:



"Huck, it'll be the bulliest thing that ever happened if we find the body

after everybody else has quit looking, and then go ahead and hunt up the

murderer.  It won't only be an honor to us, but it'll be an honor to

Uncle Silas because it was us that done it.  It'll set him up again, you

see if it don't."



But Old Jeff Hooker he throwed cold water on the whole business when we

got to his blacksmith shop and told him what we come for.



"You can take the dog," he says, "but you ain't a-going to find any

corpse, because there ain't any corpse to find. Everybody's quit looking,

and they're right.  Soon as they come to think, they knowed there warn't

no corpse. And I'll tell you for why.  What does a person kill another

person for, Tom Sawyer?--answer me that."



"Why, he--er--"



"Answer up! You ain't no fool.  What does he kill him FOR?"



"Well, sometimes it's for revenge, and--"



"Wait. One thing at a time.  Revenge, says you; and right you are.  Now

who ever had anything agin that poor trifling no-account? Who do you

reckon would want to kill HIM?--that rabbit!"



Tom was stuck.  I reckon he hadn't thought of a person having to have a

REASON for killing a person before, and now he sees it warn't likely

anybody would have that much of a grudge against a lamb like Jubiter

Dunlap. The blacksmith says, by and by:



"The revenge idea won't work, you see.  Well, then, what's next? Robbery?

B'gosh, that must 'a' been it, Tom! Yes, sirree, I reckon we've struck it

this time. Some feller wanted his gallus-buckles, and so he--"



But it was so funny he busted out laughing, and just went on laughing and

laughing and laughing till he was 'most dead, and Tom looked so put out

and cheap that I knowed he was ashamed he had come, and he wished he

hadn't. But old Hooker never let up on him.  He raked up everything a

person ever could want to kill another person about, and any fool could

see they didn't any of them fit this case, and he just made no end of fun

of the whole business and of the people that had been hunting the body;

and he said:



"If they'd had any sense they'd 'a' knowed the lazy cuss slid out because

he wanted a loafing spell after all this work. He'll come pottering back

in a couple of weeks, and then how'll you fellers feel? But, laws bless

you, take the dog, and go and hunt his remainders.  Do, Tom."



Then he busted out, and had another of them forty-rod laughs of hisn.

Tom couldn't back down after all this, so he said, "All right, unchain

him;" and the blacksmith done it, and we started home and left that old

man laughing yet.



It was a lovely dog.  There ain't any dog that's got a lovelier

disposition than a bloodhound, and this one knowed us and liked us.  He

capered and raced around ever so friendly, and powerful glad to be free

and have a holiday; but Tom was so cut up he couldn't take any intrust in

him, and said he wished he'd stopped and thought a minute before he ever

started on such a fool errand. He said old Jeff Hooker would tell

everybody, and we'd never hear the last of it.



So we loafed along home down the back lanes, feeling pretty glum and not

talking.  When we was passing the far corner of our tobacker field we

heard the dog set up a long howl in there, and we went to the place and

he was scratching the ground with all his might, and every now and then

canting up his head sideways and fetching another howl.



It was a long square, the shape of a grave; the rain had made it sink

down and show the shape.  The minute we come and stood there we looked at

one another and never said a word. When the dog had dug down only a few

inches he grabbed something and pulled it up, and it was an arm and a

sleeve. Tom kind of gasped out, and says:



"Come away, Huck--it's found."



I just felt awful.  We struck for the road and fetched the first men that

come along.  They got a spade at the crib and dug out the body, and you

never see such an excitement.  You couldn't make anything out of the

face, but you didn't need to.  Everybody said:



"Poor Jubiter; it's his clothes, to the last rag!"



Some rushed off to spread the news and tell the justice of the peace and

have an inquest, and me and Tom lit out for the house.  Tom was all afire

and 'most out of breath when we come tearing in where Uncle Silas and

Aunt Sally and Benny was.  Tom sung out:



"Me and Huck's found Jubiter Dunlap's corpse all by ourselves with a

bloodhound, after everybody else had quit hunting and given it up; and if

it hadn't a been for us it never WOULD 'a' been found; and he WAS

murdered too--they done it with a club or something like that; and I'm

going to start in and find the murderer, next, and I bet I'll do it!"



Aunt Sally and Benny sprung up pale and astonished, but Uncle Silas fell

right forward out of his chair on to the floor and groans out:



"Oh, my God, you've found him NOW!"









 CHAPTER X. THE ARREST OF UNCLE SILAS



THEM awful words froze us solid.  We couldn't move hand or foot for as

much as half a minute.  Then we kind of come to, and lifted the old man

up and got him into his chair, and Benny petted him and kissed him and

tried to comfort him, and poor old Aunt Sally she done the same; but,

poor things, they was so broke up and scared and knocked out of their

right minds that they didn't hardly know what they was about.  With Tom

it was awful; it 'most petrified him to think maybe he had got his uncle

into a thousand times more trouble than ever, and maybe it wouldn't ever

happened if he hadn't been so ambitious to get celebrated, and let the

corpse alone the way the others done. But pretty soon he sort of come to

himself again and says:



"Uncle Silas, don't you say another word like that. It's dangerous, and

there ain't a shadder of truth in it."



Aunt Sally and Benny was thankful to hear him say that, and they said the

same; but the old man he wagged his head sorrowful and hopeless, and the

tears run down his face, and he says;



"No--I done it; poor Jubiter, I done it!"



It was dreadful to hear him say it.  Then he went on and told about it,

and said it happened the day me and Tom come--along about sundown.  He

said Jubiter pestered him and aggravated him till he was so mad he just

sort of lost his mind and grabbed up a stick and hit him over the head

with all his might, and Jubiter dropped in his tracks. Then he was scared

and sorry, and got down on his knees and lifted his head up, and begged

him to speak and say he wasn't dead; and before long he come to, and when

he see who it was holding his head, he jumped like he was 'most scared to

death, and cleared the fence and tore into the woods, and was gone.  So

he hoped he wasn't hurt bad.



"But laws," he says, "it was only just fear that gave him that last

little spurt of strength, and of course it soon played out and he laid

down in the bush, and there wasn't anybody to help him, and he died."



Then the old man cried and grieved, and said he was a murderer and the

mark of Cain was on him, and he had disgraced his family and was going to

be found out and hung. But Tom said:



"No, you ain't going to be found out.  You DIDN'T kill him. ONE lick

wouldn't kill him.  Somebody else done it."



"Oh, yes," he says, "I done it--nobody else.  Who else had anything

against him? Who else COULD have anything against him?"



He looked up kind of like he hoped some of us could mention somebody that

could have a grudge against that harmless no-account, but of course it

warn't no use--he HAD us; we couldn't say a word.  He noticed that, and

he saddened down again, and I never see a face so miserable and so

pitiful to see.  Tom had a sudden idea, and says:



"But hold on!--somebody BURIED him.  Now who--"



He shut off sudden.  I knowed the reason.  It give me the cold shudders

when he said them words, because right away I remembered about us seeing

Uncle Silas prowling around with a long-handled shovel away in the night

that night. And I knowed Benny seen him, too, because she was talking

about it one day.  The minute Tom shut off he changed the subject and

went to begging Uncle Silas to keep mum, and the rest of us done the

same, and said he MUST, and said it wasn't his business to tell on

himself, and if he kept mum nobody would ever know; but if it was found

out and any harm come to him it would break the family's hearts and kill

them, and yet never do anybody any good. So at last he promised.  We was

all of us more comfortable, then, and went to work to cheer up the old

man.  We told him all he'd got to do was to keep still, and it wouldn't

be long till the whole thing would blow over and be forgot. We all said

there wouldn't anybody ever suspect Uncle Silas, nor ever dream of such a

thing, he being so good and kind, and having such a good character; and

Tom says, cordial and hearty, he says:



"Why, just look at it a minute; just consider.  Here is Uncle Silas, all

these years a preacher--at his own expense; all these years doing good

with all his might and every way he can think of--at his own expense, all

the time; always been loved by everybody, and respected; always been

peaceable and minding his own business, the very last man in this whole

deestrict to touch a person, and everybody knows it.  Suspect HIM? Why,

it ain't any more possible than--"



"By authority of the State of Arkansaw, I arrest you for the murder of

Jubiter Dunlap!" shouts the sheriff at the door.



It was awful.  Aunt Sally and Benny flung themselves at Uncle Silas,

screaming and crying, and hugged him and hung to him, and Aunt Sally said

go away, she wouldn't ever give him up, they shouldn't have him, and the

niggers they come crowding and crying to the door and--well, I couldn't

stand it; it was enough to break a person's heart; so I got out.



They took him up to the little one-horse jail in the village, and we all

went along to tell him good-bye; and Tom was feeling elegant, and says to

me, "We'll have a most noble good time and heaps of danger some dark

night getting him out of there, Huck, and it'll be talked about

everywheres and we will be celebrated;" but the old man busted that

scheme up the minute he whispered to him about it. He said no, it was his

duty to stand whatever the law done to him, and he would stick to the

jail plumb through to the end, even if there warn't no door to it. It

disappointed Tom and graveled him a good deal, but he had to put up with

it.



But he felt responsible and bound to get his uncle Silas free; and he

told Aunt Sally, the last thing, not to worry, because he was going to

turn in and work night and day and beat this game and fetch Uncle Silas

out innocent; and she was very loving to him and thanked him and said she

knowed he would do his very best.  And she told us to help Benny take

care of the house and the children, and then we had a good-bye cry all

around and went back to the farm, and left her there to live with the

jailer's wife a month till the trial in October.









 CHAPTER XI.  TOM SAWYER DISCOVERS THE MURDERERS



WELL, that was a hard month on us all.  Poor Benny, she kept up the best

she could, and me and Tom tried to keep things cheerful there at the

house, but it kind of went for nothing, as you may say.  It was the same

up at the jail.  We went up every day to see the old people, but it was

awful dreary, because the old man warn't sleeping much, and was walking

in his sleep considerable and so he got to looking fagged and miserable,

and his mind got shaky, and we all got afraid his troubles would break

him down and kill him. And whenever we tried to persuade him to feel

cheerfuler, he only shook his head and said if we only knowed what it was

to carry around a murderer's load in your heart we wouldn't talk that

way.  Tom and all of us kept telling him it WASN'T murder, but just

accidental killing! but it never made any difference--it was murder, and

he wouldn't have it any other way.  He actu'ly begun to come out plain

and square towards trial time and acknowledge that he TRIED to kill the

man.  Why, that was awful, you know.  It made things seem fifty times as

dreadful, and there warn't no more comfort for Aunt Sally and Benny. But

he promised he wouldn't say a word about his murder when others was

around, and we was glad of that.



Tom Sawyer racked the head off of himself all that month trying to plan

some way out for Uncle Silas, and many's the night he kept me up 'most

all night with this kind of tiresome work, but he couldn't seem to get on

the right track no way.  As for me, I reckoned a body might as well give

it up, it all looked so blue and I was so downhearted; but he wouldn't.

He stuck to the business right along, and went on planning and thinking

and ransacking his head.



So at last the trial come on, towards the middle of October, and we was

all in the court.  The place was jammed, of course.  Poor old Uncle

Silas, he looked more like a dead person than a live one, his eyes was so

hollow and he looked so thin and so mournful.  Benny she set on one side

of him and Aunt Sally on the other, and they had veils on, and was full

of trouble.  But Tom he set by our lawyer, and had his finger in

everywheres, of course.  The lawyer let him, and the judge let him.  He

'most took the business out of the lawyer's hands sometimes; which was

well enough, because that was only a mud-turtle of a back-settlement

lawyer and didn't know enough to come in when it rains, as the saying is.



They swore in the jury, and then the lawyer for the prostitution got up

and begun.  He made a terrible speech against the old man, that made him

moan and groan, and made Benny and Aunt Sally cry.  The way HE told about

the murder kind of knocked us all stupid it was so different from the old

man's tale.  He said he was going to prove that Uncle Silas was SEEN to

kill Jubiter Dunlap by two good witnesses, and done it deliberate, and

SAID he was going to kill him the very minute he hit him with the club;

and they seen him hide Jubiter in the bushes, and they seen that Jubiter

was stone-dead. And said Uncle Silas come later and lugged Jubiter down

into the tobacker field, and two men seen him do it. And said Uncle Silas

turned out, away in the night, and buried Jubiter, and a man seen him at

it.



I says to myself, poor old Uncle Silas has been lying about it because he

reckoned nobody seen him and he couldn't bear to break Aunt Sally's heart

and Benny's; and right he was: as for me, I would 'a' lied the same way,

and so would anybody that had any feeling, to save them such misery and

sorrow which THEY warn't no ways responsible for.  Well, it made our

lawyer look pretty sick; and it knocked Tom silly, too, for a little

spell, but then he braced up and let on that he warn't worried--but I

knowed he WAS, all the same.  And the people--my, but it made a stir

amongst them!



And when that lawyer was done telling the jury what he was going to

prove, he set down and begun to work his witnesses.



First, he called a lot of them to show that there was bad blood betwixt

Uncle Silas and the diseased; and they told how they had heard Uncle

Silas threaten the diseased, at one time and another, and how it got

worse and worse and everybody was talking about it, and how diseased got

afraid of his life, and told two or three of them he was certain Uncle

Silas would up and kill him some time or another.



Tom and our lawyer asked them some questions; but it warn't no use, they

stuck to what they said.



Next, they called up Lem Beebe, and he took the stand. It come into my

mind, then, how Lem and Jim Lane had come along talking, that time, about

borrowing a dog or something from Jubiter Dunlap; and that brought up the

blackberries and the lantern; and that brought up Bill and Jack Withers,

and how they passed by, talking about a nigger stealing Uncle Silas's

corn; and that fetched up our old ghost that come along about the same

time and scared us so--and here HE was too, and a privileged character,

on accounts of his being deef and dumb and a stranger, and they had fixed

him a chair inside the railing, where he could cross his legs and be

comfortable, whilst the other people was all in a jam so they couldn't

hardly breathe. So it all come back to me just the way it was that day;

and it made me mournful to think how pleasant it was up to then, and how

miserable ever since.



     LEM BEEBE, sworn, said--"I was a-coming along, that day,

     second of September, and Jim Lane was with me, and it was

     towards sundown, and we heard loud talk, like quarrelling,

     and we was very close, only the hazel bushes between (that's

     along the fence); and we heard a voice say, 'I've told you

     more'n once I'd kill you,' and knowed it was this prisoner's

     voice; and then we see a club come up above the bushes and

     down out of sight again, and heard a smashing thump and then

     a groan or two: and then we crope soft to where we could

     see, and there laid Jupiter Dunlap dead, and this prisoner

     standing over him with the club; and the next he hauled the

     dead man into a clump of bushes and hid him, and then we

     stooped low, to be cut of sight, and got away."



Well, it was awful.  It kind of froze everybody's blood to hear it, and

the house was 'most as still whilst he was telling it as if there warn't

nobody in it. And when he was done, you could hear them gasp and sigh,

all over the house, and look at one another the same as to say, "Ain't it

perfectly terrible--ain't it awful!"



Now happened a thing that astonished me.  All the time the first

witnesses was proving the bad blood and the threats and all that, Tom

Sawyer was alive and laying for them; and the minute they was through, he

went for them, and done his level best to catch them in lies and spile

their testimony.  But now, how different.  When Lem first begun to talk,

and never said anything about speaking to Jubiter or trying to borrow a

dog off of him, he was all alive and laying for Lem, and you could see he

was getting ready to cross-question him to death pretty soon, and then I

judged him and me would go on the stand by and by and tell what we heard

him and Jim Lane say. But the next time I looked at Tom I got the cold

shivers. Why, he was in the brownest study you ever see--miles and miles

away.  He warn't hearing a word Lem Beebe was saying; and when he got

through he was still in that brown-study, just the same.  Our lawyer

joggled him, and then he looked up startled, and says, "Take the witness

if you want him. Lemme alone--I want to think."



Well, that beat me.  I couldn't understand it.  And Benny and her

mother--oh, they looked sick, they was so troubled. They shoved their

veils to one side and tried to get his eye, but it warn't any use, and I

couldn't get his eye either. So the mud-turtle he tackled the witness,

but it didn't amount to nothing; and he made a mess of it.



Then they called up Jim Lane, and he told the very same story over again,

exact.  Tom never listened to this one at all, but set there thinking and

thinking, miles and miles away. So the mud-turtle went in alone again and

come out just as flat as he done before.  The lawyer for the prostitution

looked very comfortable, but the judge looked disgusted. You see, Tom was

just the same as a regular lawyer, nearly, because it was Arkansaw law

for a prisoner to choose anybody he wanted to help his lawyer, and Tom

had had Uncle Silas shove him into the case, and now he was botching it

and you could see the judge didn't like it much. All that the mud-turtle

got out of Lem and Jim was this: he asked them:



"Why didn't you go and tell what you saw?"



"We was afraid we would get mixed up in it ourselves. And we was just

starting down the river a-hunting for all the week besides; but as soon

as we come back we found out they'd been searching for the body, so then

we went and told Brace Dunlap all about it."



"When was that?"



"Saturday night, September 9th."



The judge he spoke up and says:



"Mr. Sheriff, arrest these two witnesses on suspicions of being

accessionary after the fact to the murder."



The lawyer for the prostitution jumps up all excited, and says:



"Your honor! I protest against this extraordi--"



"Set down!" says the judge, pulling his bowie and laying it on his

pulpit.  "I beg you to respect the Court."



So he done it.  Then he called Bill Withers.



     BILL WITHERS, sworn, said: "I was coming along about sundown,

     Saturday, September 2d, by the prisoner's field, and my

     brother Jack was with me and we seen a man toting off

     something heavy on his back and allowed it was a nigger

     stealing corn; we couldn't see distinct; next we made out that

     it was one man carrying another; and the way it hung, so kind

     of limp, we judged it was somebody that was drunk; and by the

     man's walk we said it was Parson Silas, and we judged he had

     found Sam Cooper drunk in the road, which he was always trying

     to reform him, and was toting him out of danger."



It made the people shiver to think of poor old Uncle Silas toting off the

diseased down to the place in his tobacker field where the dog dug up the

body, but there warn't much sympathy around amongst the faces, and I

heard one cuss say "'Tis the coldest blooded work I ever struck, lugging

a murdered man around like that, and going to bury him like a animal, and

him a preacher at that."



Tom he went on thinking, and never took no notice; so our lawyer took the

witness and done the best he could, and it was plenty poor enough.



Then Jack Withers he come on the stand and told the same tale, just like

Bill done.



And after him comes Brace Dunlap, and he was looking very mournful, and

most crying; and there was a rustle and a stir all around, and everybody

got ready to listen, and lost of the women folks said, "Poor cretur, poor

cretur," and you could see a many of them wiping their eyes.



     BRACE DUNLAP, sworn, said: "I was in considerable trouble a

     long time about my poor brother, but I reckoned things warn't

     near so bad as he made out, and I couldn't make myself believe

     anybody would have the heart to hurt a poor harmless cretur

     like that"--[by jings, I was sure I seen Tom give a kind of a

     faint little start, and then look disappointed again]--"and

     you know I COULDN'T think a preacher would hurt him--it warn't

     natural to think such an onlikely thing--so I never paid much

     attention, and now I sha'n't ever, ever forgive myself; for if

     I had a done different, my poor brother would be with me this

     day, and not laying yonder murdered, and him so harmless." He

     kind of broke down there and choked up, and waited to get his

     voice; and people all around said the most pitiful things, and

     women cried; and it was very still in there, and solemn, and

     old Uncle Silas, poor thing, he give a groan right out so

     everybody heard him.  Then Brace he went on, "Saturday,

     September 2d, he didn't come home to supper. By-and-by I got a

     little uneasy, and one of my niggers went over to this

     prisoner's place, but come back and said he warn't there.  So

     I got uneasier and uneasier, and couldn't rest.  I went to

     bed, but I couldn't sleep; and turned out, away late in the

     night, and went wandering over to this prisoner's place and

     all around about there a good while, hoping I would run across

     my poor brother, and never knowing he was out of his troubles

     and gone to a better shore--" So he broke down and choked up

     again, and most all the women was crying now.  Pretty soon he

     got another start and says: "But it warn't no use; so at last

     I went home and tried to get some sleep, but couldn't. Well,

     in a day or two everybody was uneasy, and they got to talking

     about this prisoner's threats, and took to the idea, which I

     didn't take no stock in, that my brother was murdered so they

     hunted around and tried to find his body, but couldn't and

     give it up.  And so I reckoned he was gone off somers to have

     a little peace, and would come back to us when his troubles

     was kind of healed.  But late Saturday night, the 9th, Lem

     Beebe and Jim Lane come to my house and told me all--told me

     the whole awful 'sassination, and my heart was broke. And THEN

     I remembered something that hadn't took no hold of me at the

     time, because reports said this prisoner had took to walking

     in his sleep and doing all kind of things of no consequence,

     not knowing what he was about.  I will tell you what that

     thing was that come back into my memory. Away late that awful

     Saturday night when I was wandering around about this

     prisoner's place, grieving and troubled, I was down by the

     corner of the tobacker-field and I heard a sound like digging

     in a gritty soil; and I crope nearer and peeped through the

     vines that hung on the rail fence and seen this prisoner

     SHOVELING--shoveling with a long-handled shovel--heaving earth

     into a big hole that was most filled up; his back was to me,

     but it was bright moonlight and I knowed him by his old green

     baize work-gown with a splattery white patch in the middle of

     the back like somebody had hit him with a snowball. HE WAS

     BURYING THE MAN HE'D MURDERED!"



And he slumped down in his chair crying and sobbing, and 'most everybody

in the house busted out wailing, and crying, and saying, "Oh, it's

awful--awful--horrible! and there was a most tremendous excitement, and

you couldn't hear yourself think; and right in the midst of it up jumps

old Uncle Silas, white as a sheet, and sings out:



"IT'S TRUE, EVERY WORD--I MURDERED HIM IN COLD BLOOD!"



By Jackson, it petrified them! People rose up wild all over the house,

straining and staring for a better look at him, and the judge was

hammering with his mallet and the sheriff yelling "Order--order in the

court--order!"



And all the while the old man stood there a-quaking and his eyes

a-burning, and not looking at his wife and daughter, which was clinging

to him and begging him to keep still, but pawing them off with his hands

and saying he WOULD clear his black soul from crime, he WOULD heave off

this load that was more than he could bear, and he WOULDN'T bear it

another hour! And then he raged right along with his awful tale,

everybody a-staring and gasping, judge, jury, lawyers, and everybody, and

Benny and Aunt Sally crying their hearts out.  And by George, Tom Sawyer

never looked at him once! Never once--just set there gazing with all his

eyes at something else, I couldn't tell what.  And so the old man raged

right along, pouring his words out like a stream of fire:



"I killed him! I am guilty! But I never had the notion in my life to hurt

him or harm him, spite of all them lies about my threatening him, till

the very minute I raised the club--then my heart went cold!--then the

pity all went out of it, and I struck to kill! In that one moment all my

wrongs come into my mind; all the insults that that man and the scoundrel

his brother, there, had put upon me, and how they laid in together to

ruin me with the people, and take away my good name, and DRIVE me to some

deed that would destroy me and my family that hadn't ever done THEM no

harm, so help me God! And they done it in a mean revenge--for why?

Because my innocent pure girl here at my side wouldn't marry that rich,

insolent, ignorant coward, Brace Dunlap, who's been sniveling here over a

brother he never cared a brass farthing for--"[I see Tom give a jump and

look glad THIS time, to a dead certainty]"--and in that moment I've told

you about, I forgot my God and remembered only my heart's bitterness, God

forgive me, and I struck to kill.  In one second I was miserably

sorry--oh, filled with remorse; but I thought of my poor family, and I

MUST hide what I'd done for their sakes; and I did hide that corpse in

the bushes; and presently I carried it to the tobacker field; and in the

deep night I went with my shovel and buried it where--"



Up jumps Tom and shouts:



"NOW, I've got it!" and waves his hand, oh, ever so fine and starchy,

towards the old man, and says:



"Set down! A murder WAS done, but you never had no hand in it!"



Well, sir, you could a heard a pin drop.  And the old man he sunk down

kind of bewildered in his seat and Aunt Sally and Benny didn't know it,

because they was so astonished and staring at Tom with their mouths open

and not knowing what they was about.  And the whole house the same. I

never seen people look so helpless and tangled up, and I hain't ever seen

eyes bug out and gaze without a blink the way theirn did.  Tom says,

perfectly ca'm:



"Your honor, may I speak?"



"For God's sake, yes--go on!" says the judge, so astonished and mixed up

he didn't know what he was about hardly.



Then Tom he stood there and waited a second or two--that was for to work

up an "effect," as he calls it--then he started in just as ca'm as ever,

and says:



"For about two weeks now there's been a little bill sticking on the front

of this courthouse offering two thousand dollars reward for a couple of

big di'monds--stole at St. Louis. Them di'monds is worth twelve thousand

dollars.  But never mind about that till I get to it.  Now about this

murder. I will tell you all about it--how it happened--who done it--every

DEtail."



You could see everybody nestle now, and begin to listen for all they was

worth.



"This man here, Brace Dunlap, that's been sniveling so about his dead

brother that YOU know he never cared a straw for, wanted to marry that

young girl there, and she wouldn't have him.  So he told Uncle Silas he

would make him sorry.  Uncle Silas knowed how powerful he was, and how

little chance he had against such a man, and he was scared and worried,

and done everything he could think of to smooth him over and get him to

be good to him: he even took his no-account brother Jubiter on the farm

and give him wages and stinted his own family to pay them; and Jubiter

done everything his brother could contrive to insult Uncle Silas, and

fret and worry him, and try to drive Uncle Silas into doing him a hurt,

so as to injure Uncle Silas with the people.  And it done it. Everybody

turned against him and said the meanest kind of things about him, and it

graduly broke his heart--yes, and he was so worried and distressed that

often he warn't hardly in his right mind.



"Well, on that Saturday that we've had so much trouble about, two of

these witnesses here, Lem Beebe and Jim Lane, come along by where Uncle

Silas and Jubiter Dunlap was at work--and that much of what they've said

is true, the rest is lies. They didn't hear Uncle Silas say he would kill

Jubiter; they didn't hear no blow struck; they didn't see no dead man,

and they didn't see Uncle Silas hide anything in the bushes. Look at them

now--how they set there, wishing they hadn't been so handy with their

tongues; anyway, they'll wish it before I get done.



"That same Saturday evening Bill and Jack Withers DID see one man lugging

off another one.  That much of what they said is true, and the rest is

lies.  First off they thought it was a nigger stealing Uncle Silas's

corn--you notice it makes them look silly, now, to find out somebody

overheard them say that.  That's because they found out by and by who it

was that was doing the lugging, and THEY know best why they swore here

that they took it for Uncle Silas by the gait--which it WASN'T, and they

knowed it when they swore to that lie.



"A man out in the moonlight DID see a murdered person put under ground in

the tobacker field--but it wasn't Uncle Silas that done the burying.  He

was in his bed at that very time.



"Now, then, before I go on, I want to ask you if you've ever noticed

this: that people, when they're thinking deep, or when they're worried,

are most always doing something with their hands, and they don't know it,

and don't notice what it is their hands are doing, some stroke their

chins; some stroke their noses; some stroke up UNDER their chin with

their hand; some twirl a chain, some fumble a button, then there's some

that draws a figure or a letter with their finger on their cheek, or

under their chin or on their under lip.  That's MY way. When I'm

restless, or worried, or thinking hard, I draw capital V's on my cheek or

on my under lip or under my chin, and never anything BUT capital V's--and

half the time I don't notice it and don't know I'm doing it."



That was odd.  That is just what I do; only I make an O. And I could see

people nodding to one another, same as they do when they mean "THAT's

so."



"Now, then, I'll go on.  That same Saturday--no, it was the night

before--there was a steamboat laying at Flagler's Landing, forty miles

above here, and it was raining and storming like the nation.  And there

was a thief aboard, and he had them two big di'monds that's advertised

out here on this courthouse door; and he slipped ashore with his hand-bag

and struck out into the dark and the storm, and he was a-hoping he could

get to this town all right and be safe. But he had two pals aboard the

boat, hiding, and he knowed they was going to kill him the first chance

they got and take the di'monds; because all three stole them, and then

this fellow he got hold of them and skipped.



"Well, he hadn't been gone more'n ten minutes before his pals found it

out, and they jumped ashore and lit out after him.  Prob'ly they burnt

matches and found his tracks.  Anyway, they dogged along after him all

day Saturday and kept out of his sight; and towards sundown he come to

the bunch of sycamores down by Uncle Silas's field, and he went in there

to get a disguise out of his hand-bag and put it on before he showed

himself here in the town--and mind you he done that just a little after

the time that Uncle Silas was hitting Jubiter Dunlap over the head with a

club--for he DID hit him.



"But the minute the pals see that thief slide into the bunch of

sycamores, they jumped out of the bushes and slid in after him.



"They fell on him and clubbed him to death.



"Yes, for all he screamed and howled so, they never had no mercy on him,

but clubbed him to death.  And two men that was running along the road

heard him yelling that way, and they made a rush into the syca-i more

bunch--which was where they was bound for, anyway--and when the pals saw

them they lit out and the two new men after them a-chasing them as tight

as they could go.  But only a minute or two--then these two new men

slipped back very quiet into the sycamores.



"THEN what did they do? I will tell you what they done. They found where

the thief had got his disguise out of his carpet-sack to put on; so one

of them strips and puts on that disguise."



Tom waited a little here, for some more "effect"--then he says, very

deliberate:



"The man that put on that dead man's disguise was--JUBITER DUNLAP!"



"Great Scott!" everybody shouted, all over the house, and old Uncle Silas

he looked perfectly astonished.



"Yes, it was Jubiter Dunlap.  Not dead, you see.  Then they pulled off

the dead man's boots and put Jubiter Dunlap's old ragged shoes on the

corpse and put the corpse's boots on Jubiter Dunlap.  Then Jubiter Dunlap

stayed where he was, and the other man lugged the dead body off in the

twilight; and after midnight he went to Uncle Silas's house, and took his

old green work-robe off of the peg where it always hangs in the passage

betwixt the house and the kitchen and put it on, and stole the

long-handled shovel and went off down into the tobacker field and buried

the murdered man."



He stopped, and stood half a minute.  Then--"And who do you reckon the

murdered man WAS? It was--JAKE Dunlap, the long-lost burglar!"



"Great Scott!"



"And the man that buried him was--BRACE Dunlap, his brother!"



"Great Scott!"



"And who do you reckon is this mowing idiot here that's letting on all

these weeks to be a deef and dumb stranger? It's--JUBITER Dunlap!"



My land, they all busted out in a howl, and you never see the like of

that excitement since the day you was born. And Tom he made a jump for

Jubiter and snaked off his goggles and his false whiskers, and there was

the murdered man, sure enough, just as alive as anybody! And Aunt Sally

and Benny they went to hugging and crying and kissing and smothering old

Uncle Silas to that degree he was more muddled and confused and mushed up

in his mind than he ever was before, and that is saying considerable.

And next, people begun to yell:



"Tom Sawyer! Tom Sawyer! Shut up everybody, and let him go on! Go on, Tom

Sawyer!"



Which made him feel uncommon bully, for it was nuts for Tom Sawyer to be

a public character that-away, and a hero, as he calls it.  So when it was

all quiet, he says:



"There ain't much left, only this.  When that man there, Bruce Dunlap,

had most worried the life and sense out of Uncle Silas till at last he

plumb lost his mind and hit this other blatherskite, his brother, with a

club, I reckon he seen his chance.  Jubiter broke for the woods to hide,

and I reckon the game was for him to slide out, in the night, and leave

the country.  Then Brace would make everybody believe Uncle Silas killed

him and hid his body somers; and that would ruin Uncle Silas and drive

HIM out of the country--hang him, maybe; I dunno.  But when they found

their dead brother in the sycamores without knowing him, because he was

so battered up, they see they had a better thing; disguise BOTH and bury

Jake and dig him up presently all dressed up in Jubiter's clothes, and

hire Jim Lane and Bill Withers and the others to swear to some handy

lies--which they done.  And there they set, now, and I told them they

would be looking sick before I got done, and that is the way they're

looking now.



"Well, me and Huck Finn here, we come down on the boat with the thieves,

and the dead one told us all about the di'monds, and said the others

would murder him if they got the chance; and we was going to help him all

we could. We was bound for the sycamores when we heard them killing him

in there; but we was in there in the early morning after the storm and

allowed nobody hadn't been killed, after all.  And when we see Jubiter

Dunlap here spreading around in the very same disguise Jake told us HE

was going to wear, we thought it was Jake his own self--and he was

goo-gooing deef and dumb, and THAT was according to agreement.



"Well, me and Huck went on hunting for the corpse after the others quit,

and we found it.  And was proud, too; but Uncle Silas he knocked us crazy

by telling us HE killed the man.  So we was mighty sorry we found the

body, and was bound to save Uncle Silas's neck if we could; and it was

going to be tough work, too, because he wouldn't let us break him out of

prison the way we done with our old nigger Jim.



"I done everything I could the whole month to think up some way to save

Uncle Silas, but I couldn't strike a thing.  So when we come into court

to-day I come empty, and couldn't see no chance anywheres.  But by and by

I had a glimpse of something that set me thinking--just a little wee

glimpse--only that, and not enough to make sure; but it set me thinking

hard--and WATCHING, when I was only letting on to think; and by and by,

sure enough, when Uncle Silas was piling out that stuff about HIM killing

Jubiter Dunlap, I catched that glimpse again, and this time I jumped up

and shut down the proceedings, because I KNOWED Jubiter Dunlap was

a-setting here before me. I knowed him by a thing which I seen him

do--and I remembered it.  I'd seen him do it when I was here a year ago."



He stopped then, and studied a minute--laying for an "effect"--I knowed

it perfectly well.  Then he turned off like he was going to leave the

platform, and says, kind of lazy and indifferent:



"Well, I believe that is all."



Why, you never heard such a howl!--and it come from the whole house:



"What WAS it you seen him do? Stay where you are, you little devil! You

think you are going to work a body up till his mouth's a-watering and

stop there? What WAS it he done?"



That was it, you see--he just done it to get an "effect"; you couldn't

'a' pulled him off of that platform with a yoke of oxen.



"Oh, it wasn't anything much," he says.  "I seen him looking a little

excited when he found Uncle Silas was actuly fixing to hang himself for a

murder that warn't ever done; and he got more and more nervous and

worried, I a-watching him sharp but not seeming to look at him--and all

of a sudden his hands begun to work and fidget, and pretty soon his left

crept up and HIS FINGER DRAWED A CROSS ON HIS CHEEK, and then I HAD him!"



Well, then they ripped and howled and stomped and clapped their hands

till Tom Sawyer was that proud and happy he didn't know what to do with

himself.



And then the judge he looked down over his pulpit and says:



"My boy, did you SEE all the various details of this strange conspiracy

and tragedy that you've been describing?"



"No, your honor, I didn't see any of them."



"Didn't see any of them! Why, you've told the whole history straight

through, just the same as if you'd seen it with your eyes.  How did you

manage that?"



Tom says, kind of easy and comfortable:



"Oh, just noticing the evidence and piecing this and that together, your

honor; just an ordinary little bit of detective work; anybody could 'a'

done it."



"Nothing of the kind! Not two in a million could 'a' done it. You are a

very remarkable boy."



Then they let go and give Tom another smashing round, and he--well, he

wouldn't 'a' sold out for a silver mine. Then the judge says:



"But are you certain you've got this curious history straight?"



"Perfectly, your honor.  Here is Brace Dunlap--let him deny his share of

it if he wants to take the chance; I'll engage to make him wish he hadn't

said anything...... Well, you see HE'S pretty quiet.  And his brother's

pretty quiet, and them four witnesses that lied so and got paid for it,

they're pretty quiet.  And as for Uncle Silas, it ain't any use for him

to put in his oar, I wouldn't believe him under oath!"



Well, sir, that fairly made them shout; and even the judge he let go and

laughed.  Tom he was just feeling like a rainbow. When they was done

laughing he looks up at the judge and says:



"Your honor, there's a thief in this house."



"A thief?"



"Yes, sir.  And he's got them twelve-thousand-dollar di'monds on him."



By gracious, but it made a stir! Everybody went shouting:



"Which is him? which is him? p'int him out!"



And the judge says:



"Point him out, my lad.  Sheriff, you will arrest him. Which one is it?"



Tom says:



"This late dead man here--Jubiter Dunlap."



Then there was another thundering let-go of astonishment and excitement;

but Jubiter, which was astonished enough before, was just fairly

putrified with astonishment this time. And he spoke up, about half

crying, and says:



"Now THAT'S a lie.  Your honor, it ain't fair; I'm plenty bad enough

without that.  I done the other things--Brace he put me up to it, and

persuaded me, and promised he'd make me rich, some day, and I done it,

and I'm sorry I done it, and I wisht I hadn't; but I hain't stole no

di'monds, and I hain't GOT no di'monds; I wisht I may never stir if it

ain't so.  The sheriff can search me and see."



Tom says:



"Your honor, it wasn't right to call him a thief, and I'll let up on that

a little.  He did steal the di'monds, but he didn't know it.  He stole

them from his brother Jake when he was laying dead, after Jake had stole

them from the other thieves; but Jubiter didn't know he was stealing

them; and he's been swelling around here with them a month; yes, sir,

twelve thousand dollars' worth of di'monds on him--all that riches, and

going around here every day just like a poor man.  Yes, your honor, he's

got them on him now."



The judge spoke up and says:



"Search him, sheriff."



Well, sir, the sheriff he ransacked him high and low, and everywhere:

searched his hat, socks, seams, boots, everything--and Tom he stood there

quiet, laying for another of them effects of hisn.  Finally the sheriff

he give it up, and everybody looked disappointed, and Jubiter says:



"There, now! what'd I tell you?"



And the judge says:



"It appears you were mistaken this time, my boy."



Then Tom took an attitude and let on to be studying with all his might,

and scratching his head.  Then all of a sudden he glanced up chipper, and

says:



"Oh, now I've got it! I'd forgot."



Which was a lie, and I knowed it.  Then he says:



"Will somebody be good enough to lend me a little small screwdriver?

There was one in your brother's hand-bag that you smouched, Jubiter.  but

I reckon you didn't fetch it with you."



"No, I didn't. I didn't want it, and I give it away."



"That's because you didn't know what it was for."



Jubiter had his boots on again, by now, and when the thing Tom wanted was

passed over the people's heads till it got to him, he says to Jubiter:



"Put up your foot on this chair." And he kneeled down and begun to

unscrew the heel-plate, everybody watching; and when he got that big

di'mond out of that boot-heel and held it up and let it flash and blaze

and squirt sunlight everwhichaway, it just took everybody's breath; and

Jubiter he looked so sick and sorry you never see the like of it.  And

when Tom held up the other di'mond he looked sorrier than ever.  Land! he

was thinking how he would 'a' skipped out and been rich and independent

in a foreign land if he'd only had the luck to guess what the screwdriver

was in the carpet-bag for.



Well, it was a most exciting time, take it all around, and Tom got cords

of glory.  The judge took the di'monds, and stood up in his pulpit, and

cleared his throat, and shoved his spectacles back on his head, and says:



"I'll keep them and notify the owners; and when they send for them it

will be a real pleasure to me to hand you the two thousand dollars, for

you've earned the money--yes, and you've earned the deepest and most

sincerest thanks of this community besides, for lifting a wronged and

innocent family out of ruin and shame, and saving a good and honorable

man from a felon's death, and for exposing to infamy and the punishment

of the law a cruel and odious scoundrel and his miserable creatures!"



Well, sir, if there'd been a brass band to bust out some music, then, it

would 'a' been just the perfectest thing I ever see, and Tom Sawyer he

said the same.



Then the sheriff he nabbed Brace Dunlap and his crowd, and by and by next

month the judge had them up for trial and jailed the whole lot.  And

everybody crowded back to Uncle Silas's little old church, and was ever

so loving and kind to him and the family and couldn't do enough for them;

and Uncle Silas he preached them the blamedest jumbledest idiotic sermons

you ever struck, and would tangle you up so you couldn't find your way

home in daylight; but the people never let on but what they thought it

was the clearest and brightest and elegantest sermons that ever was; and

they would set there and cry, for love and pity; but, by George, they

give me the jim-jams and the fan-tods and caked up what brains I had, and

turned them solid; but by and by they loved the old man's intellects back

into him again, and he was as sound in his skull as ever he was, which

ain't no flattery, I reckon.  And so the whole family was as happy as

birds, and nobody could be gratefuler and lovinger than what they was to

Tom Sawyer; and the same to me, though I hadn't done nothing.  And when

the two thousand dollars come, Tom give half of it to me, and never told

anybody so, which didn't surprise me, because I knowed him.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tom Sawyer, Detective

by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













                               FOLLOWING

                              THE EQUATOR

                       A JOURNEY AROUND THE WORLD

                                   BY

                               MARK TWAIN

                           SAMUEL L. CLEMENS

                         HARTFORD, CONNECTICUT









                               THIS BOOK

                     Is affectionately inscribed to

                            MY YOUNG FRIEND

                              HARRY ROGERS

                            WITH RECOGNITION

         OF WHAT HE IS, AND APPREHENSION OF WHAT HE MAY BECOME

              UNLESS HE FORM HIMSELF A LITTLE MORE CLOSELY

                           UPON THE MODEL OF

                              THE AUTHOR.











                         THE PUDD'NHEAD MAXIMS.

            THESE WISDOMS ARE FOR THE LURING OF YOUTH TOWARD

               HIGH MORAL ALTITUDES.  THE AUTHOR DID NOT

                  GATHER THEM FROM PRACTICE, BUT FROM

                   OBSERVATION.  TO BE GOOD IS NOBLE;

                         BUT TO SHOW OTHERS HOW

                          TO BE GOOD IS NOBLER

                            AND NO TROUBLE.









                                 CONTENTS



CHAPTER I.

The Party--Across America to Vancouver--On Board the Warrimo--Steamer

Chairs-The Captain-Going Home under a Cloud--A Gritty Purser--The

Brightest Passenger--Remedy for Bad Habits--The Doctor and the Lumbago

--A Moral Pauper--Limited Smoking--Remittance-men.





CHAPTER II.

Change of Costume--Fish, Snake, and Boomerang Stories--Tests of Memory

--A Brahmin Expert--General Grant's Memory--A Delicately Improper Tale





CHAPTER III.

Honolulu--Reminiscences of the Sandwich Islands--King Liholiho and His

Royal Equipment--The Tabu--The Population of the Island--A Kanaka Diver

--Cholera at Honolulu--Honolulu; Past and Present--The Leper Colony





CHAPTER IV.

Leaving Honolulu--Flying-fish--Approaching the Equator--Why the Ship Went

Slow--The Front Yard of the Ship--Crossing the Equator--Horse Billiards

or Shovel Board--The Waterbury Watch--Washing Decks--Ship Painters--The

Great Meridian--The Loss of a Day--A Babe without a Birthday





CHAPTER V.

A lesson in Pronunciation--Reverence for Robert Burns--The Southern

Cross--Troublesome Constellations--Victoria for a Name--Islands on the

Map--Alofa and Fortuna--Recruiting for the Queensland Plantations

--Captain Warren's NoteBook--Recruiting not thoroughly Popular





CHAPTER VI.

Missionaries Obstruct Business--The Sugar Planter and the Kanaka--The

Planter's View--Civilizing the Kanaka The Missionary's View--The Result

--Repentant Kanakas--Wrinkles--The Death Rate in Queensland





CHAPTER VII.

The  Fiji Islands--Suva--The Ship from Duluth--Going Ashore--Midwinter in

Fiji--Seeing the Governor--Why Fiji was Ceded to England--Old time

Fijians--Convicts among the Fijians--A Case Where Marriage was a Failure

Immortality with Limitations





CHAPTER VIII.

A Wilderness of Islands--Two Men without a Country--A Naturalist from New

Zealand--The Fauna of Australasia--Animals, Insects, and Birds--The

Ornithorhynchus--Poetry and Plagiarism





CHAPTER IX.



Close to Australia--Porpoises at Night--Entrance to Sydney Harbor--The

Loss of the Duncan Dunbar--The Harbor--The City of Sydney--Spring-time in

Australia--The Climate--Information for Travelers--The Size of Australia

--A Dust-Storm and Hot Wind





CHAPTER X.

The  Discovery of Australia--Transportation of Convicts--Discipline

--English Laws, Ancient and Modern--Flogging Prisoners to Death--Arrival of

Settlers--New South Wales Corps--Rum Currency--Intemperance Everywhere

$100,000 for One Gallon of Rum--Development of the Country--Immense

Resources





CHAPTER XI.

Hospitality of English-speaking People--Writers and their Gratitude--Mr.

Gane and the Panegyrics--Population of Sydney An English City with

American Trimming--"Squatters"--Palaces and Sheep Kingdoms--Wool and

Mutton--Australians and Americans--Costermonger Pronunciation--England is

"Home"--Table Talk--English and Colonial Audiences 124





CHAPTER XII.

Mr. X., a Missionary--Why Christianity Makes Slow Progress in India--A

Large Dream--Hindoo Miracles and Legends--Sampson and Hanuman--The

Sandstone Ridge--Where are the Gates?





CHAPTER XIII.

Public Works in Australasia--Botanical Garden of Sydney--Four Special

Socialties--The Government House--A Governor and His Functions--The

Admiralty House--The Tour of the Harbor--Shark Fishing--Cecil Rhodes'

Shark and his First Fortune--Free Board for Sharks.





CHAPTER XIV.

Bad Health--To Melbourne by Rail--Maps Defective--The Colony of Victoria

--A Round-trip Ticket from Sydney--Change Cars, from Wide to Narrow

Gauge, a Peculiarity at Albury--Customs-fences--"My Word"--The Blue

Mountains--Rabbit Piles--Government R. R. Restaurants--Duchesses for

Waiters--"Sheep-dip"--Railroad Coffee--Things Seen and Not Seen





CHAPTER XV.

Wagga-Wagga--The Tichborne Claimant--A Stock Mystery--The Plan of the

Romance--The Realization--The Henry Bascom Mystery--Bascom Hall--The

Author's Death and Funeral





CHAPTER XVI.

Melbourne and its Attractions--The Melbourne Cup Races--Cup Day--Great

Crowds--Clothes Regardless of Cost--The Australian Larrikin--Is He Dead?

Australian Hospitality--Melbourne Wool-brokers--The Museums--The Palaces

--The Origin of Melbourne





CHAPTER XVII.

The British Empire--Its Exports and Imports--The Trade of Australia--To

Adelaide--Broken Hill Silver Mine--A Roundabout road--The Scrub and its

Possibilities for the Novelist--The Aboriginal Tracker--A Test Case--How

Does One Cow-Track Differ from Another?





CHAPTER XVIII.

Gum Trees--Unsociable Trees--Gorse and Broom--A universal Defect--An

Adventurer--Wanted L200, got L20,000,000--A Vast Land Scheme--The

Smash-up--The Corpse Got Up and Danced--A Unique Business by One Man

--Buying the Kangaroo Skin--The Approach to Adelaide--Everything Comes to

Him who Waits--A Healthy Religious sphere--What is the Matter with the

Specter?





CHAPTER XIX.



The Botanical Gardens--Contributions from all Countries--The

Zoological Gardens of Adelaide--The Laughing Jackass--The Dingo--A

Misnamed Province--Telegraphing from Melbourne to San Francisco--A Mania

for Holidays--The Temperature--The Death Rate--Celebration of the

Reading of the Proclamation of 1836--Some old Settlers at the

Commemoration--Their Staying Powers--The Intelligence of the Aboriginal

--The Antiquity of the Boomerang





CHAPTER XX.

A Caller--A Talk about Old Times--The Fox Hunt--An Accurate Judgment of

an Idiot--How We Passed the Custom Officers in Italy





CHAPTER XXI.

The "Weet-Weet"--Keeping down the Population--Victoria--Killing the

Aboriginals--Pioneer Days in Queensland--Material for a Drama--The Bush

--Pudding with Arsenic Revenge--A Right Spirit but a Wrong Method--Death of

Donga Billy





CHAPTER XXII.

Continued Description of Aboriginals--Manly Qualities--Dodging Balls

--Feats of Spring--Jumping--Where the Kangaroo Learned its Art 'Well

Digging--Endurance--Surgery--Artistic Abilities--Fennimore Cooper's Last

Chance--Australian Slang





CHAPTER XXIII.

To Horsham (Colony of Victoria)--Description of Horsham--At the Hotel

--Pepper Tree-The Agricultural College, Forty Pupils--High Temperature

--Width of Road in Chains, Perches, etc.--The Bird with a Forgettable

Name--The Magpie and the Lady--Fruit Trees--Soils--Sheep Shearing--To Stawell

--Gold Mining Country--$75,000 per Month Income and able to Keep House

--Fine Grapes and Wine--The Dryest Community on Earth--The Three Sisters

--Gum Trees and Water





CHAPTER XXIV.



Road to Ballarat--The City--Great Gold Strike, 1851--Rush for Australia

--"Great Nuggets"--Taxation--Revolt and Victory--Peter Lalor and the

Eureka Stockade--"Pencil Mark"--Fine Statuary at Ballarat--Population

--Ballarat English





CHAPTER XXV.

Bound for Bendigo--The Priest at Castlemaine--Time Saved by Walking

--Description of Bendigo--A Valuable Nugget--Perseverence and Success

--Mr. Blank and His Influence--Conveyance of an Idea--I Had to Like the

Irishman--Corrigan Castle, and the Mark Twain Club--My Bascom Mystery

Solved





CHAPTER XXVI.

Where New Zealand Is--But Few Know--Things People Think They Know--The

Yale Professor and His Visitor from N. Z.





CHAPTER XXVII.

The South Pole Swell--Tasmania--Extermination of the Natives--The Picture

Proclamation--The Conciliator--The Formidable Sixteen





CHAPTER XXVIII.

When the Moment Comes the Man Appears--Why Ed. Jackson called on

Commodore Vanderbilt--Their Interview--Welcome to the Child of His Friend

--A Big Time but under Inspection--Sent on Important Business--A Visit to

the Boys on the Boat





CHAPTER XXIX:

Tasmania, Early Days--Description of the Town of Hobart--An Englishman's

Love of Home Surroundings--Neatest City on Earth--The Museum--A Parrot

with an Acquired Taste--Glass Arrow Beads--Refuge for the Indigent too

healthy





CHAPTER XXX.

Arrival at Bluff, N. Z.--Where the Rabbit Plague Began--The Natural Enemy

of the Rabbit--Dunedin--A Lovely Town--Visit to Dr. Hockin--His Museum

--A Liquified Caterpillar--The Unperfected Tape Worm--The Public Museum and

Picture





CHAPTER XXXI.  The Express Train--"A Hell of a Hotel at Maryborough"

--Clocks and Bells--Railroad Service.





CHAPTER XXXII.

Description of the Town of Christ Church--A Fine Museum--Jade-stone

Trinkets--The Great Man--The First Maori in New Zealand--Women Voters

--"Person" in New Zealand Law Includes Woman--Taming an Ornithorhynchus

--A Voyage in the 'Flora' from Lyttelton--Cattle Stalls for Everybody

--A Wonderful Time.





CHAPTER XXXIII.

The Town of Nelson--"The Mongatapu Murders," the Great Event of the Town

--Burgess' Confession--Summit of Mount Eden--Rotorua and the Hot Lakes

and Geysers--Thermal Springs District--Kauri Gum--Tangariwa Mountains





CHAPTER XXXIV.

The Bay of Gisborne--Taking in Passengers by the Yard Arm--The Green

Ballarat Fly--False Teeth--From Napier to Hastings by the Ballarat Fly

Train--Kauri Trees--A Case of Mental Telegraphy





CHAPTER XXXV.

Fifty Miles in Four Hours--Comfortable Cars--Town of Wauganui--Plenty of

Maoris--On the Increase--Compliments to the Maoris--The Missionary Ways

all Wrong--The Tabu among the Maoris--A Mysterious Sign--Curious

War-monuments--Wellington





CHAPTER XXXVI.

The Poems of Mrs. Moore--The Sad Fate of William Upson--A Fellow Traveler

Imitating the Prince of Wales--A Would-be Dude--Arrival at Sydney

--Curious Town Names with Poem





CHAPTER XXXVII.

From Sydney for Ceylon--A Lascar Crew--A Fine Ship--Three Cats and a

Basket of Kittens--Dinner Conversations--Veuve Cliquot Wine--At Anchor in

King George's Sound Albany Harbor--More Cats--A Vulture on Board--Nearing

the Equator again--Dressing for Dinner--Ceylon, Hotel Bristol--Servant

Brampy--A Feminine Man--Japanese Jinriksha or Cart--Scenes in Ceylon--A

Missionary School--Insincerity of Clothes





CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Steamer Rosettes to Bombay--Limes 14 cents a Barrel--Bombay, a Bewitching

City--Descriptions of People and Dress--Woman as a Road Decoration

--India, the Land of Dreams and Romance--Fourteen Porters to Carry Baggage

--Correcting a Servant--Killing a Slave--Arranging a Bedroom--Three Hours'

Work and a Terrible Racket--The Bird of Birds, the Indian Crow





CHAPTER XXXIX.

God Vishnu, 108 Names--Change of Titles or Hunting for an Heir--Bombay as

a Kaleidoscope--The Native's Man Servant--Servants' Recommendations--How

Manuel got his Name and his English--Satan--A Visit from God





CHAPTER XL.

The Government House at Malabar Point--Mansion of Kumar Shri Samatsin Hji

Bahadur--The Indian Princess--A Difficult Game--Wardrobe and Jewels

--Ceremonials--Decorations when Leaving--The Towers of Silence--A Funeral





CHAPTER XLI.

Jain Temple--Mr. Roychand's Bungalow--A Decorated Six-Gun Prince--Human

Fireworks--European Dress, Past and Present--Complexions--Advantages with

the Zulu--Festivities at the Bungalow-Nautch Dancers--Entrance of the

Prince--Address to the Prince





CHAPTER XLII.

A Hindoo Betrothal, midnight, Sleepers on the ground, Home of the Bride

of Twelve Years Dressed as a Boy--Illumination Nautch Girls--Imitating

Snakes--Later--Illuminated Porch Filled with Sleepers--The Plague





CHAPTER XLIII

Murder Trial in Bombay--Confidence Swindlers--Some Specialities of India

--The Plague, Juggernaut, Suttee, etc.--Everything on Gigantic Scale

--India First in Everything--80 States, more Custom Houses than Cats--Rich

Ground for Thug Society





CHAPTER XLIV.

Thug Book--Supplies for Traveling, Bedding, and other Freight--Scene at

Railway Station--Making Way for White Man--Waiting Passengers, High and

Low Caste, Touch in the cars--Our Car--Beds made up--Dreaming of Thugs

--Baroda--Meet Friends--Indian Well--The Old Town--Narrow Streets--A Mad

Elephant



CHAPTER XLV.



Elephant Riding--Howdahs--The New Palace--The Prince's Excursion--Gold

and Silver Artillery--A Vice-royal Visit--Remarkable Dog--The Bench Show

--Augustin Daly's Back Door--Fakeer





CHAPTER XLVI.

The Thugs--Government Efforts to Exterminate them--Choking a Victim A

Fakeer Spared--Thief Strangled





CHAPTER XLVII.

Thugs, Continued--Record of Murders--A Joy of Hunting and Killing Men

--Gordon Gumming--Killing an Elephant--Family Affection among Thugs

--Burial Places





CHAPTER XLVIII.

Starting for Allahabad--Lower Berths in Sleepers--Elderly Ladies have

Preference of Berths--An American Lady Takes One Anyhow--How Smythe Lost

his Berth--How He Got Even--The Suttee





CHAPTER XLIX.

Pyjamas--Day Scene in India--Clothed in a Turban and a Pocket

Handkerchief--Land Parceled Out--Established Village Servants--Witches in

Families--Hereditary Midwifery--Destruction of Girl Babies--Wedding

Display--Tiger-Persuader--Hailstorm Discourages--The Tyranny of the

Sweeper--Elephant Driver--Water Carrier--Curious Rivers--Arrival at

Allahabad--English Quarter--Lecture Hall Like a Snowstorm--Private

Carriages--A Milliner--Early Morning--The Squatting Servant--A Religious

Fair





CHAPTER L.

On the Road to Benares--Dust and Waiting--The Bejeweled Crowd--A Native

Prince and his Guard--Zenana Lady--The Extremes of Fashion--The Hotel at

Benares--An Annex a Mile Away--Doors in India--The Peepul Tree--Warning

against Cold Baths--A Strange Fruit--Description of Benares--The

Beginning of Creation--Pilgrims to Benares--A Priest with a Good Business

Stand--Protestant Missionary--The Trinity Brahma, Shiva, and Vishnu

--Religion the Business at Benares





CHAPTER LI.

Benares a Religious Temple--A Guide for Pilgrims to Save Time in Securing

Salvation





CHAPTER LII.

A Curious Way to Secure Salvation--The Banks of the Ganges--Architecture

Represents Piety--A Trip on the River--Bathers and their Costumes

--Drinking the Water--A Scientific Test of the Nasty Purifier--Hindoo Faith

in the Ganges--A Cremation--Remembrances of the Suttee--All Life Sacred

Except Human Life--The Goddess Bhowanee, and the Sacrificers--Sacred

Monkeys--Ugly Idols Everywhere--Two White Minarets--A Great View with a

Monkey in it--A Picture on the Water





CHAPTER LIII.

Still in Benares--Another Living God--Why Things are Wonderful--Sri 108

Utterly Perfect--How He Came so--Our Visit to Sri--A Friendly Deity

Exchanging Autographs and Books--Sri's Pupil--An Interesting Man

--Reverence and Irreverence--Dancing in a Sepulchre





CHAPTER LIV.

Rail to Calcutta--Population--The "City of Palaces"--A Fluted

Candle-stick--Ochterlony--Newspaper Correspondence--Average Knowledge of

Countries--A Wrong Idea of Chicago--Calcutta and the Black Hole

--Description of the Horrors--Those Who Lived--The Botanical Gardens--The

Afternoon Turnout--Grand Review--Military Tournament--Excursion on the

Hoogly--The Museum--What Winter Means Calcutta





CHAPTER LV

On the Road Again--Flannels in Order--Across Country--From Greenland's

Icy Mountain--Swapping Civilization--No Field women in India--How it is

in Other Countries--Canvas-covered Cars--The Tiger Country--My First Hunt

Some Elephants Get Away--The Plains of India--The Ghurkas--Women for

Pack-Horses--A Substitute for a Cab--Darjeeling--The Hotel--The Highest

Thing in the Himalayas--The Club--Kinchinjunga and Mt. Everest

--Thibetans--The Prayer Wheel--People Going to the Bazar





CHAPTER LVI.

On the Road Again--The Hand-Car--A Thirty-five-mile Slide--The Banyan

Tree--A Dramatic Performance--The Railroad--The Half-way House--The Brain

Fever Bird--The Coppersmith Bird--Nightingales and Cue Owls





CHAPTER LVII.

India the Most Extraordinary Country on Earth--Nothing Forgotten--The

Land of Wonders--Annual Statistics Everywhere about Violence--Tiger vs.

Man--A Handsome Fight--Annual Man Killing and Tiger Killing--Other

Animals--Snakes--Insurance and Snake Tables--The Cobra Bite--Muzaffurpore

--Dinapore--A Train that Stopped for Gossip--Six Hours for Thirty-five

Miles--A Rupee to the Engineer--Ninety Miles an Hour--Again to Benares,

the Piety Hive To Lucknow





CHAPTER LVIII.

The Great Mutiny--The Massacre in Cawnpore--Terrible Scenes in Lucknow

--The Residency--The Siege





CHAPTER LIX.

A Visit to the Residency--Cawnpore--The Adjutant Bird and the Hindoo

Corpse--The Tai Mahal--The True Conception--The Ice Storm--True Gems

--Syrian Fountains--An Exaggerated Niagara





CHAPTER LX.

To Lahore--The Governor's Elephant--Taking a Ride-No Danger from

Collision--Rawal Pindi--Back to Delhi--An Orientalized Englishman

--Monkeys and the Paint-pot--Monkey Crying over my Note-book--Arrival at

Jeypore--In Rajputana--Watching Servants--The Jeypore Hotel--Our Old and

New Satan--Satan as a Liar--The Museum--A Street Show--Blocks of Houses

--A Religious Procession





CHAPTER LXI.

Methods in American Deaf and Dumb Asylums--Methods in the Public Schools

--A Letter from a youth in Punjab--Highly Educated Service--A Damage to

the Country--A Little Book from Calcutta--Writing Poor English

--Embarrassed by a Beggar Girl--A Specimen Letter--An Application for

Employment--A Calcutta School Examination--Two Samples of

Literature





CHAPTER LXII.

Sail from Calcutta to Madras--Thence to Ceylon--Thence for  Mauritius

--The Indian Ocean--Our Captain's Peculiarity The Scot Has one too--The

Flying-fish that Went Hunting in the Field--Fined for Smuggling--Lots of

pets on Board--The Color of the Sea--The Most Important Member of

Nature's Family--The Captain's Story of Cold Weather--Omissions in the

Ship's Library--Washing Decks--Pyjamas on Deck--The Cat's Toilet--No

Interest in the Bulletin--Perfect Rest--The Milky Way and the Magellan

Clouds--Mauritius--Port Louis--A Hot Country--Under French Control

--A Variety of People and Complexions--Train to Curepipe--A Wonderful

Office-holder--The Wooden Peg Ornament--The Prominent Historical Event of

Mauritius--"Paul and Virginia"--One of Virginia's Wedding Gifts--Heaven

Copied after Mauritius--Early History of Mauritius--Quarantines

--Population of all Kinds--What the World Consists of--Where Russia and

Germany are--A Picture of Milan Cathedral--Newspapers--The Language--Best

Sugar in the World--Literature of Mauritius





CHAPTER LXIII.

Port Louis--Matches no Good--Good Roads--Death Notices--Why European

Nations Rob Each Other--What Immigrants to Mauritius Do--Population

--Labor Wages--The Camaron--The Palmiste and other Eatables--Monkeys--The

Cyclone of 1892--Mauritius a Sunday Landscape





CHAPTER LXIV.

The Steamer "Arundel Castle"--Poor Beds in Ships--The Beds in Noah's Ark

--Getting a Rest in Europe--Ship in Sight--Mozambique Channel--The

Engineer and the Band--Thackeray's "Madagascar"--Africanders Going Home

--Singing on the After Deck--An Out-of-Place Story--Dynamite Explosion in

Johannesburg--Entering Delagoa Bay--Ashore--A Hot Winter--Small Town--No

Sights--No Carriages--Working Women--Barnum's Purchase of Shakespeare's

Birthplace, Jumbo, and the Nelson Monument--Arrival at Durban





CHAPTER LXV.

Royal Hotel Durban--Bells that Did not Ring--Early Inquiries for Comforts

--Change of Temperature after Sunset-Rickhaws--The Hotel Chameleon

--Natives not out after the Bell--Preponderance of Blacks in Natal--Hair

Fashions in Natal--Zulus for Police--A Drive round the Berea--The Cactus

and other Trees--Religion a Vital Matter--Peculiar Views about Babies

--Zulu Kings--A Trappist Monastery--Transvaal Politics--Reasons why the

Trouble came About





CHAPTER LXVI.

Jameson over the Border--His Defeat and Capture--Sent to England for

Trial--Arrest of Citizens by the Boers--Commuted sentences--Final Release

of all but Two--Interesting Days for a Stranger--Hard to Understand

Either Side--What the Reformers Expected to Accomplish--How They Proposed

to do it--Testimonies a Year Later--A "Woman's Part"--The Truth of the

South African Situation--"Jameson's Ride"--A Poem





CHAPTER LXVIL

Jameson's Raid--The Reform Committee's Difficult Task--Possible Plans

--Advice that Jameson Ought to Have--The War of 1881 and its Lessons

--Statistics of Losses of the Combatants--Jameson's Battles--Losses on Both

Sides--The Military Errors--How the Warfare Should Have Been Carried on

to Be Successful





CHAPTER LXVIII.

Judicious Mr. Rhodes--What South Africa Consists of--Johannesburg--The

Gold Mines--The Heaven of American Engineers--What the Author Knows about

Mining--Description of the Boer--What Should be Expected of Him--What Was

A Dizzy Jump for Rhodes--Taxes--Rhodesian Method of Reducing Native

Population--Journeying in Cape Colony--The Cars--The Country--The

Weather--Tamed Blacks--Familiar Figures in King William's Town--Boer

Dress--Boer Country Life--Sleeping Accommodations--The Reformers in Boer

Prison--Torturing a Black Prisoner





CHAPTER LXIX.

An Absorbing Novelty--The Kimberley Diamond Mines--Discovery of Diamonds

--The Wronged Stranger--Where the Gems Are--A Judicious Change of

Boundary--Modern Machinery and Appliances--Thrilling Excitement in

Finding a Diamond--Testing a Diamond--Fences--Deep Mining by Natives in

the Compound--Stealing--Reward for the Biggest Diamond--A Fortune in

Wine--The Great Diamond--Office of the De Beer Co.--Sorting the Gems

--Cape Town--The Most Imposing Man in British Provinces--Various Reasons

for his Supremacy--How He Makes Friends





CONCLUSION.

Table Rock--Table Bay--The Castle--Government and Parliament--The Club

--Dutch Mansions and their Hospitality--Dr. John Barry and his Doings--On

the Ship Norman--Madeira--Arrived in Southampton











                          FOLLOWING THE EQUATOR





CHAPTER I.



A man may have no bad habits and have worse.

                             --Pudd'nhead Wilson's New Calendar.



The starting point of this lecturing-trip around the world was Paris,

where we had been living a year or two.



We sailed for America, and there made certain preparations.  This took

but little time.  Two members of my family elected to go with me.  Also a

carbuncle.  The dictionary says a carbuncle is a kind of jewel.  Humor is

out of place in a dictionary.



We started westward from New York in midsummer, with Major Pond to manage

the platform-business as far as the Pacific.  It was warm work, all the

way, and the last fortnight of it was suffocatingly smoky, for in Oregon

and Columbia the forest fires were raging.  We had an added week of smoke

at the seaboard, where we were obliged awhile for our ship.  She had been

getting herself ashore in the smoke, and she had to be docked and

repaired.



We sailed at last; and so ended a snail-paced march across the continent,

which had lasted forty days.



We moved westward about mid-afternoon over a rippled and summer sea; an

enticing sea, a clean and cool sea, and apparently a welcome sea to all

on board; it certainly was to the distressful dustings and smokings and

swelterings of the past weeks.  The voyage would furnish a three-weeks

holiday, with hardly a break in it.  We had the whole Pacific Ocean in

front of us, with nothing to do but do nothing and be comfortable.  The

city of Victoria was twinkling dim in the deep heart of her smoke-cloud,

and getting ready to vanish and now we closed the field-glasses and sat

down on our steamer chairs contented and at peace.  But they went to

wreck and ruin under us and brought us to shame before all the

passengers.  They had been furnished by the largest furniture-dealing

house in Victoria, and were worth a couple of farthings a dozen, though

they had cost us the price of honest chairs.  In the Pacific and Indian

Oceans one must still bring his own deck-chair on board or go without,

just as in the old forgotten Atlantic times--those Dark Ages of sea

travel.



Ours was a reasonably comfortable ship, with the customary sea-going fare

--plenty of good food furnished by the Deity and cooked by the devil.

The discipline observable on board was perhaps as good as it is anywhere

in the Pacific and Indian Oceans.  The ship was not very well arranged

for tropical service; but that is nothing, for this is the rule for ships

which ply in the tropics.  She had an over-supply of cockroaches, but

this is also the rule with ships doing business in the summer seas--at

least such as have been long in service.  Our young captain was a very

handsome man, tall and perfectly formed, the very figure to show up a

smart uniform's best effects.  He was a man of the best intentions and

was polite and courteous even to courtliness.  There was a soft and

finish about his manners which made whatever place he happened to be in

seem for the moment a drawing room.  He avoided the smoking room.  He had

no vices.  He did not smoke or chew tobacco or take snuff; he did not

swear, or use slang or rude, or coarse, or indelicate language, or make

puns, or tell anecdotes, or laugh intemperately, or raise his voice above

the moderate pitch enjoined by the canons of good form. When he gave an

order, his manner modified it into a request.  After dinner he and his

officers joined the ladies and gentlemen in the ladies' saloon, and

shared in the singing and piano playing, and helped turn the music.  He

had a sweet and sympathetic tenor voice, and used it with taste and

effect the music he played whist there, always with the same partner and

opponents, until the ladies' bedtime.  The electric lights burned there

as late as the ladies and their friends might desire; but they were not

allowed to burn in the smoking-room after eleven.  There were many laws

on the ship's statute book of course; but so far as I could see, this and

one other were the only ones that were rigidly enforced.  The captain

explained that he enforced this one because his own cabin adjoined the

smoking-room, and the smell of tobacco smoke made him sick.  I did not

see how our smoke could reach him, for the smoking-room and his cabin

were on the upper deck, targets for all the winds that blew; and besides

there was no crack of communication between them, no opening of any sort

in the solid intervening bulkhead.  Still, to a delicate stomach even

imaginary smoke can convey damage.



The captain, with his gentle nature, his polish, his sweetness, his moral

and verbal purity, seemed pathetically out of place in his rude and

autocratic vocation.  It seemed another instance of the irony of fate.



He was going home under a cloud.  The passengers knew about his trouble,

and were sorry for him.  Approaching Vancouver through a narrow and

difficult passage densely befogged with smoke from the forest fires, he

had had the ill-luck to lose his bearings and get his ship on the rocks.

A matter like this would rank merely as an error with you and me; it

ranks as a crime with the directors of steamship companies.  The captain

had been tried by the Admiralty Court at Vancouver, and its verdict had

acquitted him of blame.  But that was insufficient comfort.  A sterner

court would examine the case in Sydney--the Court of Directors, the lords

of a company in whose ships the captain had served as mate a number of

years.  This was his first voyage as captain.



The officers of our ship were hearty and companionable young men, and

they entered into the general amusements and helped the passengers pass

the time.  Voyages in the Pacific and Indian Oceans are but pleasure

excursions for all hands.  Our purser was a young Scotchman who was

equipped with a grit that was remarkable.  He was an invalid, and looked

it, as far as his body was concerned, but illness could not subdue his

spirit.  He was full of life, and had a gay and capable tongue.  To all

appearances he was a sick man without being aware of it, for he did not

talk about his ailments, and his bearing and conduct were those of a

person in robust health; yet he was the prey, at intervals, of ghastly

sieges of pain in his heart.  These lasted many hours, and while the

attack continued he could neither sit nor lie.  In one instance he stood

on his feet twenty-four hours fighting for his life with these sharp

agonies, and yet was as full of life and cheer and activity

the next day as if nothing had happened.



The brightest passenger in the ship, and the most interesting and

felicitous talker, was a young Canadian who was not able to let the

whisky bottle alone. He was of a rich and powerful family, and could have

had a distinguished career and abundance of effective help toward it if

he could have conquered his appetite for drink; but he could not do it,

so his great equipment of talent was of no use to him. He had often taken

the pledge to drink no more, and was a good sample of what that sort of

unwisdom can do for a man--for a man with anything short of an iron will.

The system is wrong in two ways: it does not strike at the root of the

trouble, for one thing, and to make a pledge of any kind is to declare

war against nature; for a pledge is a chain that is always clanking and

reminding the wearer of it that he is not a free man.



I have said that the system does not strike at the root of the trouble,

and I venture to repeat that. The root is not the drinking, but the

desire to drink.  These are very different things.  The one merely

requires will--and a great deal of it, both as to bulk and staying

capacity--the other merely requires watchfulness--and for no long time.

The desire of course precedes the act, and should have one's first

attention; it can do but little good to refuse the act over and over

again, always leaving the desire unmolested, unconquered; the desire will

continue to assert itself, and will be almost sure to win in the long

run.  When the desire intrudes, it should be at once banished out of the

mind.  One should be on the watch for it all the time--otherwise it will

get in.  It must be taken in time and not allowed to get a lodgment.  A

desire constantly repulsed for a fortnight should die, then.  That should

cure the drinking habit.  The system of refusing the mere act of

drinking, and leaving the desire in full force, is unintelligent war

tactics, it seems to me.  I used to take pledges--and soon violate them.

My will was not strong, and I could not help it.  And then, to be tied in

any way naturally irks an otherwise free person and makes him chafe in

his bonds and want to get his liberty.  But when I finally ceased from

taking definite pledges, and merely resolved that I would kill an

injurious desire, but leave myself free to resume the desire and the

habit whenever I should choose to do so, I had no more trouble.  In five

days I drove out the desire to smoke and was not obliged to keep watch

after that; and I never experienced any strong desire to smoke again.  At

the end of a year and a quarter of idleness I began to write a book, and

presently found that the pen was strangely reluctant to go.  I tried a

smoke to see if that would help me out of the difficulty.  It did.  I

smoked eight or ten cigars and as many pipes a day for five months;

finished the book, and did not smoke again until a year had gone by and

another book had to be begun.



I can quit any of my nineteen injurious habits at any time, and without

discomfort or inconvenience.  I think that the Dr. Tanners and those

others who go forty days without eating do it by resolutely keeping out

the desire to eat, in the beginning, and that after a few hours the

desire is discouraged and comes no more.



Once I tried my scheme in a large medical way.  I had been confined to my

bed several days with lumbago.  My case refused to improve.  Finally the

doctor said,--



"My remedies have no fair chance.  Consider what they have to fight,

besides the lumbago.  You smoke extravagantly, don't you?"



"Yes."



"You take coffee immoderately?"



"Yes."



"And some tea?"



"Yes."



"You eat all kinds of things that are dissatisfied with each other's

company?"



"Yes."



"You drink two hot Scotches every night?"



"Yes."



"Very well, there you see what I have to contend against.  We can't make

progress the way the matter stands.  You must make a reduction in these

things; you must cut down your consumption of them considerably for some

days."



"I can't, doctor."



"Why can't you."



"I lack the will-power.  I can cut them off entirely, but I can't merely

moderate them."



He said that that would answer, and said he would come around in

twenty-four hours and begin work again.  He was taken ill himself and

could not come; but I did not need him.  I cut off all those things for

two days and nights; in fact, I cut off all kinds of food, too, and all

drinks except water, and at the end of the forty-eight hours the lumbago

was discouraged and left me.  I was a well man; so I gave thanks and took

to those delicacies again.



It seemed a valuable medical course, and I recommended it to a lady.  She

had run down and down and down, and had at last reached a point where

medicines no longer had any helpful effect upon her.  I said I knew I

could put her upon her feet in a week.  It brightened her up, it filled

her with hope, and she said she would do everything I told her to do.  So

I said she must stop swearing and drinking, and smoking and eating for

four days, and then she would be all right again.  And it would have

happened just so, I know it; but she said she could not stop swearing,

and smoking, and drinking, because she had never done those things.  So

there it was.  She had neglected her habits, and hadn't any.  Now that

they would have come good, there were none in stock.  She had nothing to

fall back on.  She was a sinking vessel, with no freight in her to throw

over lighten ship withal.  Why, even one or two little bad habits could

have saved her, but she was just a moral pauper. When she could have

acquired them she was dissuaded by her parents, who were ignorant people

though reared in the best society, and it was too late to begin now.  It

seemed such a pity; but there was no help for it.  These things ought to

be attended to while a person is young; otherwise, when age and disease

come, there is nothing effectual to fight them with.



When I was a youth I used to take all kinds of pledges, and do my best to

keep them, but I never could, because I didn't strike at the root of the

habit--the desire; I generally broke down within the month.  Once I tried

limiting a habit.  That worked tolerably well for a while.  I pledged

myself to smoke but one cigar a day.  I kept the cigar waiting until

bedtime, then I had a luxurious time with it.  But desire persecuted me

every day and all day long; so, within the week I found myself hunting

for larger cigars than I had been used to smoke; then larger ones still,

and still larger ones.  Within the fortnight I was getting cigars made

for me--on a yet larger pattern.  They still grew and grew in size.

Within the month my cigar had grown to such proportions that I could have

used it as a crutch.  It now seemed to me that a one-cigar limit was no

real protection to a person, so I knocked my pledge on the head and

resumed my liberty.



To go back to that young Canadian.  He was a "remittance man," the first

one I had ever seen or heard of.  Passengers explained the term to me.

They said that dissipated ne'er-do-wells belonging to important families

in England and Canada were not cast off by their people while there was

any hope of reforming them, but when that last hope perished at last, the

ne'er-do-well was sent abroad to get him out of the way.  He was shipped

off with just enough money in his pocket--no, in the purser's pocket--for

the needs of the voyage--and when he reached his destined port he would

find a remittance awaiting him there.  Not a large one, but just enough

to keep him a month.  A similar remittance would come monthly thereafter.

It was the remittance-man's custom to pay his month's board and lodging

straightway--a duty which his landlord did not allow him to forget--then

spree away the rest of his money in a single night, then brood and mope

and grieve in idleness till the next remittance came.  It is a pathetic

life.



We had other remittance-men on board, it was said.  At least they said

they were R. M.'s.  There were two.  But they did not resemble the

Canadian; they lacked his tidiness, and his brains, and his gentlemanly

ways, and his resolute spirit, and his humanities and generosities.  One

of them was a lad of nineteen or twenty, and he was a good deal of a

ruin, as to clothes, and morals, and general aspect.  He said he was a

scion of a ducal house in England, and had been shipped to Canada for the

house's relief, that he had fallen into trouble there, and was now being

shipped to Australia.  He said he had no title.  Beyond this remark he

was economical of the truth.  The first thing he did in Australia was to

get into the lockup, and the next thing he did was to proclaim himself an

earl in the police court in the morning and fail to prove it.









CHAPTER II.



When in doubt, tell the truth.

                                  --Pudd'nhead Wilson's New Calendar.



About four days out from Victoria we plunged into hot weather, and all

the male passengers put on white linen clothes.  One or two days later we

crossed the 25th parallel of north latitude, and then, by order, the

officers of the ship laid away their blue uniforms and came out in white

linen ones.  All the ladies were in white by this time.  This prevalence

of snowy costumes gave the promenade deck an invitingly cool, and

cheerful and picnicky aspect.



From my diary:



There are several sorts of ills in the world from which a person can

never escape altogether, let him journey as far as he will.  One escapes

from one breed of an ill only to encounter another breed of it.  We have

come far from the snake liar and the fish liar, and there was rest and

peace in the thought; but now we have reached the realm of the boomerang

liar, and sorrow is with us once more.  The first officer has seen a man

try to escape from his enemy by getting behind a tree; but the enemy sent

his boomerang sailing into the sky far above and beyond the tree; then it

turned, descended, and killed the man.  The Australian passenger has seen

this thing done to two men, behind two trees--and by the one arrow.  This

being received with a large silence that suggested doubt, he buttressed

it with the statement that his brother once saw the boomerang kill a bird

away off a hundred yards and bring it to the thrower.  But these are ills

which must be borne.  There is no other way.



The talk passed from the boomerang to dreams--usually a fruitful subject,

afloat or ashore--but this time the output was poor.  Then it passed to

instances of extraordinary memory--with better results.  Blind Tom, the

negro pianist, was spoken of, and it was said that he could accurately

play any piece of music, howsoever long and difficult, after hearing it

once; and that six months later he could accurately play it again,

without having touched it in the interval.  One of the most striking of

the stories told was furnished by a gentleman who had served on the staff

of the Viceroy of India.  He read the details from his note-book, and

explained that he had written them down, right after the consummation of

the incident which they described, because he thought that if he did not

put them down in black and white he might presently come to think he had

dreamed them or invented them.



The Viceroy was making a progress, and among the shows offered by the

Maharajah of Mysore for his entertainment was a memory-exhibition.

The Viceroy and thirty gentlemen of his suite sat in a row, and the

memory-expert, a high-caste Brahmin, was brought in and seated on the

floor in front of them.  He said he knew but two languages, the English

and his own, but would not exclude any foreign tongue from the tests to

be applied to his memory.  Then he laid before the assemblage his program

--a sufficiently extraordinary one.  He proposed that one gentleman

should give him one word of a foreign sentence, and tell him its place in

the sentence.  He was furnished with the French word 'est', and was told

it was second in a sentence of three words.  The next, gentleman gave him

the German word 'verloren' and said it was the third in a sentence of

four words.  He asked the next gentleman for one detail in a sum in

addition; another for one detail in a sum of subtraction; others for

single details in mathematical problems of various kinds; he got them.

Intermediates gave him single words from sentences in Greek, Latin,

Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, and other languages, and told him their

places in the sentences.  When at last everybody had furnished him a

single rag from a foreign sentence or a figure from a problem, he went

over the ground again, and got a second word and a second figure and was

told their places in the sentences and the sums; and so on and so on.  He

went over the ground again and again until he had collected all the parts

of the sums and all the parts of the sentences--and all in disorder, of

course, not in their proper rotation.  This had occupied two hours.



The Brahmin now sat silent and thinking, a while, then began and repeated

all the sentences, placing the words in their proper order, and untangled

the disordered arithmetical problems and gave accurate answers to them

all.



In the beginning he had asked the company to throw almonds at him during

the two hours, he to remember how many each gentleman had thrown; but

none were thrown, for the Viceroy said that the test would be a

sufficiently severe strain without adding that burden to it.



General Grant had a fine memory for all kinds of things, including even

names and faces, and I could have furnished an instance of it if I had

thought of it.  The first time I ever saw him was early in his first term

as President.  I had just arrived in Washington from the Pacific coast, a

stranger and wholly unknown to the public, and was passing the White

House one morning when I met a friend, a Senator from Nevada.  He asked

me if I would like to see the President.  I said I should be very glad;

so we entered.  I supposed that the President would be in the midst of a

crowd, and that I could look at him in peace and security from a

distance, as another stray cat might look at another king.  But it was in

the morning, and the Senator was using a privilege of his office which I

had not heard of--the privilege of intruding upon the Chief Magistrate's

working hours.  Before I knew it, the Senator and I were in the presence,

and there was none there but we three.  General Grant got slowly up from

his table, put his pen down, and stood before me with the iron expression

of a man who had not smiled for seven years, and was not intending to

smile for another seven.  He looked me steadily in the eyes--mine lost

confidence and fell.  I had never confronted a great man before, and was

in a miserable state of funk and inefficiency.  The Senator said:--



"Mr. President, may I have the privilege of introducing Mr. Clemens?"



The President gave my hand an unsympathetic wag and dropped it.  He did

not say a word but just stood.  In my trouble I could not think of

anything to say, I merely wanted to resign.  There was an awkward pause,

a dreary pause, a horrible pause.  Then I thought of something, and

looked up into that unyielding face, and said timidly:--



"Mr. President, I--I am embarrassed.  Are you?"



His face broke--just a little--a wee glimmer, the momentary flicker of a

summer-lightning smile, seven years ahead of time--and I was out and gone

as soon as it was.



Ten years passed away before I saw him the second time.  Meantime I was

become better known; and was one of the people appointed to respond to

toasts at the banquet given to General Grant in Chicago--by the Army of

the Tennessee when he came back from his tour around the world.  I

arrived late at night and got up late in the morning.  All the corridors

of the hotel were crowded with people waiting to get a glimpse of General

Grant when he should pass to the place whence he was to review the great

procession.  I worked my way by the suite of packed drawing-rooms, and at

the corner of the house I found a window open where there was a roomy

platform decorated with flags, and carpeted.  I stepped out on it, and

saw below me millions of people blocking all the streets, and other

millions caked together in all the windows and on all the house-tops

around.  These masses took me for General Grant, and broke into volcanic

explosions and cheers; but it was a good place to see the procession, and

I stayed.  Presently I heard the distant blare of military music, and far

up the street I saw the procession come in sight, cleaving its way

through the huzzaing multitudes, with Sheridan, the most martial

figure of the War, riding at its head in the dress uniform of a

Lieutenant-General.



And now General Grant, arm-in-arm with Major Carter Harrison, stepped out

on the platform, followed two and two by the badged and uniformed

reception committee.  General Grant was looking exactly as he had looked

upon that trying occasion of ten years before--all iron and bronze

self-possession.  Mr. Harrison came over and led me to the General and

formally introduced me.  Before I could put together the proper remark,

General Grant said--



"Mr. Clemens, I am not embarrassed.  Are you?"--and that little

seven-year smile twinkled across his face again.



Seventeen years have gone by since then, and to-day, in New York, the

streets are a crush of people who are there to honor the remains of the

great soldier as they pass to their final resting-place under the

monument; and the air is heavy with dirges and the boom of artillery, and

all the millions of America are thinking of the man who restored the

Union and the flag, and gave to democratic government a new lease of

life, and, as we may hope and do believe, a permanent place among the

beneficent institutions of men.



We had one game in the ship which was a good time-passer--at least it was

at night in the smoking-room when the men were getting freshened up from

the day's monotonies and dullnesses.  It was the completing of

non-complete stories.  That is to say, a man would tell all of a story

except the finish, then the others would try to supply the ending out of

their own invention.  When every one who wanted a chance had had it, the

man who had introduced the story would give it its original ending--then

you could take your choice.  Sometimes the new endings turned out to be

better than the old one.  But the story which called out the most

persistent and determined and ambitious effort was one which had no

ending, and so there was nothing to compare the new-made endings with.

The man who told it said he could furnish the particulars up to a certain

point only, because that was as much of the tale as he knew.  He had read

it in a volume of `sketches twenty-five years ago, and was interrupted

before the end was reached.  He would give any one fifty dollars who

would finish the story to the satisfaction of a jury to be appointed by

ourselves.  We appointed a jury and wrestled with the tale.  We invented

plenty of endings, but the jury voted them all down.  The jury was right.

It was a tale which the author of it may possibly have completed

satisfactorily, and if he really had that good fortune I would like to

know what the ending was.  Any ordinary man will find that the story's

strength is in its middle, and that there is apparently no way to

transfer it to the close, where of course it ought to be.  In substance

the storiette was as follows:



John Brown, aged thirty-one, good, gentle, bashful, timid, lived in a

quiet village in Missouri.  He was superintendent of the Presbyterian

Sunday-school.  It was but a humble distinction; still, it was his only

official one, and he was modestly proud of it and was devoted to its work

and its interests.  The extreme kindliness of his nature was recognized

by all; in fact, people said that he was made entirely out of good

