

"Yes, sir! the miracles, too.  Every one of them.  Now, there's that

business with the prophets of Baal; like enough that stumped you?"



"Well, I don't know but--"



"Own up now; it stumped you.  Well, I don't wonder.  You hadn't had any

experience in raveling such things out, and naturally it was too many for

you.  Would you like to have me explain that thing to you, and show you

how to get at the meat of these matters?"



"Indeed, I would, captain, if you don't mind."



Then the captain proceeded as follows: "I'll do it with pleasure.  First,

you see, I read and read, and thought and thought, till I got to

understand what sort of people they were in the old Bible times, and then

after that it was all clear and easy.  Now this was the way I put it up,

concerning Isaac--[This is the captain's own mistake]--and the prophets

of Baal.  There was some mighty sharp men among the public characters of

that old ancient day, and Isaac was one of them.  Isaac had his failings

--plenty of them, too; it ain't for me to apologize for Isaac; he played

it on the prophets of Baal, and like enough he was justifiable,

considering the odds that was against him.  No, all I say is, 'twa'n't

any miracle, and that I'll show you so's't you can see it yourself.



"Well, times had been getting rougher and rougher for prophets--that is,

prophets of Isaac's denomination.  There was four hundred and fifty

prophets of Baal in the community, and only one Presbyterian; that is,

if Isaac was a Presbyterian, which I reckon he was, but it don't say.

Naturally, the prophets of Baal took all the trade.  Isaac was pretty

low-spirited, I reckon, but he was a good deal of a man, and no doubt he

went a-prophesying around, letting on to be doing a land-office business,

but 'twa'n't any use; he couldn't run any opposition to amount to

anything.  By and by things got desperate with him; he sets his head to

work and thinks it all out, and then what does he do?  Why, he begins to

throw out hints that the other parties are this and that and t'other

--nothing very definite, maybe, but just kind of undermining their

reputation in a quiet way.  This made talk, of course, and finally got to

the king.  The king asked Isaac what he meant by his talk.  Says Isaac,

'Oh, nothing particular; only, can they pray-down fire from heaven on an

altar?  It ain't much, maybe, your majesty, only can they do it?  That's

the idea.'  So the king was a good deal disturbed, and he went to the

prophets of Baal, and they said, pretty airy, that if he had an altar

ready, they were ready; and they intimated he better get it insured, too.



"So next morning all the children of Israel and their parents and the

other people gathered themselves together.  Well, here was that great

crowd of prophets of Baal packed together on one side, and Isaac walking

up and down all alone on the other, putting up his job.  When time was

called, Isaac let on to be comfortable and indifferent; told the other

team to take the first innings.  So they went at it, the whole four

hundred and fifty, praying around the altar, very hopeful, and doing

their level best.  They prayed an hour--two hours--three hours--and so

on, plumb till noon.  It wa'n't any use; they hadn't took a trick.  Of

course they felt kind of ashamed before all those people, and well they

might.  Now, what would a magnanimous man do?  Keep still, wouldn't he?

Of course.  What did Isaac do?  He graveled the prophets of Baal every

way he could think of.  Says he, 'You don't speak up loud enough; your

god's asleep, like enough, or maybe he's taking a walk; you want to

holler, you know'--or words to that effect; I don't recollect the exact

language.  Mind, I don't apologize for Isaac; he had his faults.



"Well, the prophets of Baal prayed along the best they knew how all the

afternoon, and never raised, a spark.  At last, about sundown, they were

all tuckered out, and they owned up and quit.



"What does Isaac do now?  He steps up and says to some friends of his

there, 'Pour four barrels of water on the altar!'  Everybody was

astonished; for the other side had prayed at it dry, you know, and got

whitewashed.  They poured it on.  Says he, 'Heave on four more barrels.'

Then he says, 'Heave on four more.'  Twelve barrels, you see, altogether.

The water ran all over the altar, and all down the sides, and filled up a

trench around it that would hold a couple of hogsheads-'measures,' it

says; I reckon it means about a hogshead.  Some of the people were going

to put on their things and go, for they allowed he was crazy.  They

didn't know Isaac.  Isaac knelt down and began to pray; he strung along,

and strung along, about the heathen in distant lands, and about the

sister churches, and about the state and the country at large, and about

those that's in authority in the government, and all the usual program,

you know, till everybody had got tired and gone to thinking about

something else, and then, all of a sudden, when nobody was noticing, he

outs with a match and rakes it on the under side of his leg, and pff! up

the whole thing blazes like a house afire!  Twelve barrels of water?

Petroleum, sir, PETROLEUM! that's what it was!"



"Petroleum, captain?"



"Yes, sir, the country was full of it.  Isaac knew all about that.

You read the Bible.  Don't you worry about the tough places.  They ain't

tough when you come to think them out and throw light on them.  There

ain't a thing in the Bible but what is true; all you want is to go

prayerfully to work and cipher out how 'twas done."



At eight o'clock on the third morning out from New York, land was

sighted.  Away across the sunny waves one saw a faint dark stripe

stretched along under the horizon-or pretended to see it, for the credit

of his eyesight.  Even the Reverend said he saw it, a thing which was

manifestly not so.  But I never have seen any one who was morally strong

enough to confess that he could not see land when others claimed that

they could.



By and by the Bermuda Islands were easily visible.  The principal one lay

upon the water in the distance, a long, dull-colored body; scalloped with

slight hills and valleys.  We could not go straight at it, but had to

travel all the way around it, sixteen miles from shore, because it is

fenced with an invisible coral reef.  At last we sighted buoys, bobbing

here and there, and then we glided into a narrow channel among them,

"raised the reef," and came upon shoaling blue water that soon further

shoaled into pale green, with a surface scarcely rippled.  Now came the

resurrection hour; the berths gave up their dead.  Who are these pale

specters in plug-hats and silken flounces that file up the companionway

in melancholy procession and step upon the deck?  These are they which

took the infallible preventive of seasickness in New York harbor and then

disappeared and were forgotten.  Also there came two or three faces not

seen before until this moment.  One's impulse is to ask, "Where did you

come aboard?"



We followed the narrow channel a long time, with land on both sides--low

hills that might have been green and grassy, but had a faded look

instead.  However, the land-locked water was lovely, at any rate, with

its glittering belts of blue and green where moderate soundings were, and

its broad splotches of rich brown where the rocks lay near the surface.

Everybody was feeling so well that even the grave, pale young man (who,

by a sort of kindly common consent, had come latterly to be referred to

as "The Ass") received frequent and friendly notice--which was right

enough, for there was no harm in him.



At last we steamed between two island points whose rocky jaws allowed

only just enough room for the vessel's body, and now before us loomed

Hamilton on her clustered hillsides and summits, the whitest mass of

terraced architecture that exists in the world, perhaps.



It was Sunday afternoon, and on the pier were gathered one or two hundred

Bermudians, half of them black, half of them white, and all of them

nobbily dressed, as the poet says.



Several boats came off to the ship, bringing citizens.  One of these

citizens was a faded, diminutive old gentleman, who approached our most

ancient passenger with a childlike joy in his twinkling eyes, halted

before him, folded his arms, and said, smiling with all his might and

with all the simple delight that was in him, "You don't know me, John!

Come, out with it now; you know you don't!"



The ancient passenger scanned him perplexedly, scanned the napless,

threadbare costume of venerable fashion that had done Sunday service no

man knows how many years, contemplated the marvelous stovepipe hat of

still more ancient and venerable pattern, with its poor, pathetic old

stiff brim canted up "gallusly" in the wrong places, and said, with a

hesitation that indicated strong internal effort to "place" the gentle

old apparition, "Why .  .  .  let me see .  .  .  plague on it .  .  .

there's something about you that .  .  .  er .  .  .  er .  .  .  but

I've been gone from Bermuda for twenty-seven years, and .  .  .  hum, hum

.  .  .  I don't seem to get at it, somehow, but there's something about

you that is just as familiar to me as--"



"Likely it might be his hat," murmured the Ass, with innocent,

sympathetic interest.



So the Reverend and I had at last arrived at Hamilton, the principal town

in the Bermuda Islands.  A wonderfully white town; white as snow itself.

White as marble; white as flour.  Yet looking like none of these,

exactly.  Never mind, we said; we shall hit upon a figure by and by that

will describe this peculiar white.



It was a town that was compacted together upon the sides and tops of a

cluster of small hills.  Its outlying borders fringed off and thinned

away among the cedar forests, and there was no woody distance of curving

coast or leafy islet sleeping upon the dimpled, painted sea, but was

flecked with shining white points--half-concealed houses peeping out of

the foliage.  The architecture of the town was mainly Spanish, inherited

from the colonists of two hundred and fifty years ago.  Some

ragged-topped cocoa-palms, glimpsed here and there, gave the land

a tropical aspect.



There was an ample pier of heavy masonry; upon this, under shelter, were

some thousands of barrels containing that product which has carried the

fame of Bermuda to many lands, the potato.  With here and there an onion.

That last sentence is facetious; for they grow at least two onions in

Bermuda to one potato.  The onion is the pride and joy of Bermuda.  It is

her jewel, her gem of gems.  In her conversation, her pulpit, her

literature, it is her most frequent and eloquent figure.  In Bermuda

metaphor it stands for perfection--perfection absolute.



The Bermudian weeping over the departed exhausts praise when he says, "He

was an onion!"  The Bermudian extolling the living hero bankrupts

applause when he says, "He is an onion!"  The Bermudian setting his son

upon the stage of life to dare and do for himself climaxes all counsel,

supplication, admonition, comprehends all ambition, when he says, "Be an

onion!"



When parallel with the pier, and ten or fifteen steps outside it, we

anchored.  It was Sunday, bright and sunny.  The groups upon the pier

--men, youths, and boys-were whites and blacks in about equal proportion.

All were well and neatly dressed; many of them nattily, a few of them

very stylishly.  One would have to travel far before he would find

another town of twelve thousand inhabitants that could represent itself

so respectably, in the matter of clothes, on a freight-pier, without

premeditation or effort.  The women and young girls, black and white, who

occasionally passed by, were nicely clad, and many were elegantly and

fashionably so.  The men did not affect summer clothing much, but the

girls and women did, and their white garments were good to look at, after

so many months of familiarity with somber colors.



Around one isolated potato-barrel stood four young gentlemen, two black,

two white, becomingly dressed, each with the head of a slender cane

pressed against his teeth, and each with a foot propped up on the barrel.

Another young gentleman came up, looked longingly at the barrel, but saw

no rest for his foot there, and turned pensively away to seek another

barrel.  He wandered here and there, but without result.  Nobody sat upon

a barrel, as is the custom of the idle in other lands, yet all the

isolated barrels were humanly occupied.  Whosoever had a foot to spare

put it on a barrel, if all the places on it were not already taken.  The

habits of all peoples are determined by their circumstances.  The

Bermudians lean upon barrels because of the scarcity of lamp-posts.



Many citizens came on board and spoke eagerly to the officers--inquiring

about the Turco-Russian war news, I supposed.  However, by listening

judiciously I found that this was not so.  They said, "What is the price

of onions?" or, "How's onions?"  Naturally enough this was their first

interest; but they dropped into the war the moment it was satisfied.



We went ashore and found a novelty of a pleasant nature: there were no

hackmen, hacks, or omnibuses on the pier or about it anywhere, and nobody

offered his services to us, or molested us in any way.  I said it was

like being in heaven.  The Reverend rebukingly and rather pointedly

advised me to make the most of it, then.  We knew of a boarding-house,

and what we needed now was somebody to pilot us to it.  Presently a

little barefooted colored boy came along, whose raggedness was

conspicuously not Bermudian.  His rear was so marvelously bepatched with

colored squares and triangles that one was half persuaded he had got it

out of an atlas.  When the sun struck him right, he was as good to follow

as a lightning-bug.  We hired him and dropped into his wake.  He piloted

us through one picturesque street after another, and in due course

deposited us where we belonged.  He charged nothing for his map, and but

a trifle for his services: so the Reverend doubled it.  The little chap

received the money with a beaming applause in his eye which plainly said,

"This man's an onion!"



We had brought no letters of introduction; our names had been misspelled

in the passenger-list; nobody knew whether we were honest folk or

otherwise.  So we were expecting to have a good private time in case

there was nothing in our general aspect to close boarding-house doors

against us.  We had no trouble.  Bermuda has had but little experience of

rascals, and is not suspicious.  We got large, cool, well-lighted rooms

on a second floor, overlooking a bloomy display of flowers and flowering

shrubscalia and annunciation lilies, lantanas, heliotrope, jasmine,

roses, pinks, double geraniums, oleanders, pomegranates, blue

morning-glories of a great size, and many plants that were unknown to me.



We took a long afternoon walk, and soon found out that that exceedingly

white town was built of blocks of white coral.  Bermuda is a coral

island, with a six-inch crust of soil on top of it, and every man has a

quarry on his own premises.  Everywhere you go you see square recesses

cut into the hillsides, with perpendicular walls unmarred by crack or

crevice, and perhaps you fancy that a house grew out of the ground there,

and has been removed in a single piece from the mold.  If you do, you

err.  But the material for a house has been quarried there.  They cut

right down through the coral, to any depth that is convenient--ten to

twenty feet--and take it out in great square blocks.  This cutting is

done with a chisel that has a handle twelve or fifteen feet long, and is

used as one uses a crowbar when he is drilling a hole, or a dasher when

he is churning.  Thus soft is this stone.  Then with a common handsaw

they saw the great blocks into handsome, huge bricks that are two feet

long, a foot wide, and about six inches thick.  These stand loosely piled

during a month to harden; then the work of building begins.



The house is built of these blocks; it is roofed with broad coral slabs

an inch thick, whose edges lap upon each other, so that the roof looks

like a succession of shallow steps or terraces; the chimneys are built of

the coral blocks, and sawed into graceful and picturesque patterns; the

ground-floor veranda is paved with coral blocks; also the walk to the

gate; the fence is built of coral blocks--built in massive panels, with

broad capstones and heavy gate-posts, and the whole trimmed into easy

lines and comely shape with the saw.  Then they put a hard coat of

whitewash, as thick as your thumb-nail, on the fence and all over the

house, roof, chimneys, and all; the sun comes out and shines on this

spectacle, and it is time for you to shut your unaccustomed eyes, lest

they be put out.  It is the whitest white you can conceive of, and the

blindingest.  A Bermuda house does not look like marble; it is a much

intenser white than that; and, besides, there is a dainty, indefinable

something else about its look that is not marble-like.  We put in a great

deal of solid talk and reflection over this matter of trying to find a

figure that would describe the unique white of a Bermuda house, and we

contrived to hit upon it at last.  It is exactly the white of the icing

of a cake, and has the same unemphasized and scarcely perceptible polish.

The white of marble is modest and retiring compared with it.



After the house is cased in its hard scale of whitewash, not a crack, or

sign of a seam, or joining of the blocks is detectable, from base-stone

to chimney-top; the building looks as if it had been carved from a single

block of stone, and the doors and windows sawed out afterward.  A white

marble house has a cold, tomb-like, unsociable look, and takes the

conversation out of a body and depresses him.  Not so with a Bermuda

house.  There is something exhilarating, even hilarious, about its vivid

whiteness when the sun plays upon it.  If it be of picturesque shape and

graceful contour--and many of the Bermudian dwellings are--it will so

fascinate you that you will keep your eyes on it until they ache.  One of

those clean-cut, fanciful chimneys--too pure and white for this world

--with one side glowing in the sun and the other touched with a soft

shadow, is an object that will charm one's gaze by the hour.  I know of

no other country that has chimneys worthy to be gazed at and gloated

over.  One of those snowy houses, half concealed and half glimpsed

through green foliage, is a pretty thing to see; and if it takes one by

surprise and suddenly, as he turns a sharp corner of a country road, it

will wring an exclamation from him, sure.



Wherever you go, in town or country, you find those snowy houses, and

always with masses of bright-colored flowers about them, but with no

vines climbing their walls; vines cannot take hold of the smooth, hard

whitewash.  Wherever you go, in the town or along the country roads,

among little potato farms and patches or expensive country-seats, these

stainless white dwellings, gleaming out from flowers and foliage, meet

you at every turn.  The least little bit of a cottage is as white and

blemishless as the stateliest mansion.  Nowhere is there dirt or stench,

puddle or hog-wallow, neglect, disorder, or lack of trimness and

neatness.  The roads, the streets, the dwellings, the people, the

clothes--this neatness extends to everything that falls under the eye.

It is the tidiest country in the world.  And very much the tidiest, too.



Considering these things, the question came up, Where do the poor live?

No answer was arrived at.  Therefore, we agreed to leave this conundrum

for future statesmen to wrangle over.



What a bright and startling spectacle one of those blazing white country

palaces, with its brown-tinted window-caps and ledges, and green

shutters, and its wealth of caressing flowers and foliage, would be in

black London!  And what a gleaming surprise it would be in nearly any

American city one could mention, too!



Bermuda roads are made by cutting down a few inches into the solid white

coral--or a good many feet, where a hill intrudes itself--and smoothing

off the surface of the road-bed.  It is a simple and easy process.  The

grain of the coral is coarse and porous; the road-bed has the look of

being made of coarse white sugar.  Its excessive cleanness and whiteness

are a trouble in one way: the sun is reflected into your eyes with such

energy as you walk along that you want to sneeze all the time.  Old

Captain Tom Bowling found another difficulty.  He joined us in our walk,

but kept wandering unrestfully to the roadside.  Finally he explained.

Said he, "Well, I chew, you know, and the road's so plagued clean."



We walked several miles that afternoon in the bewildering glare of the

sun, the white roads, and the white buildings.  Our eyes got to paining

us a good deal.  By and by a soothing, blessed twilight spread its cool

balm around.  We looked up in pleased surprise and saw that it proceeded

from an intensely black negro who was going by.  We answered his military

salute in the grateful gloom of his near presence, and then passed on

into the pitiless white glare again.



The colored women whom we met usually bowed and spoke; so did the

children.  The colored men commonly gave the military salute.  They

borrow this fashion from the soldiers, no doubt; England has kept a

garrison here for generations.  The younger men's custom of carrying

small canes is also borrowed from the soldiers, I suppose, who always

carry a cane, in Bermuda as everywhere else in Britain's broad dominions.



The country roads curve and wind hither and thither in the delightfulest

way, unfolding pretty surprises at every turn: billowy masses of oleander

that seem to float out from behind distant projections like the pink

cloud-banks of sunset; sudden plunges among cottages and gardens, life

and activity, followed by as sudden plunges into the somber twilight and

stillness of the woods; flitting visions of white fortresses and beacon

towers pictured against the sky on remote hilltops; glimpses of shining

green sea caught for a moment through opening headlands, then lost again;

more woods and solitude; and by and by another turn lays bare, without

warning, the full sweep of the inland ocean, enriched with its bars of

soft color and graced with its wandering sails.



Take any road you please, you may depend upon it you will not stay in it

half a mile. Your road is everything that a road ought to be: it is

bordered with trees, and with strange plants and flowers; it is shady and

pleasant, or sunny and still pleasant; it carries you by the prettiest

and peacefulest and most homelike of homes, and through stretches of

forest that lie in a deep hush sometimes, and sometimes are alive with

the music of birds; it curves always, which is a continual promise,

whereas straight roads reveal everything at a glance and kill interest.

Your road is all this, and yet you will not stay in it half a mile, for

the reason that little seductive, mysterious roads are always branching

out from it on either hand, and as these curve sharply also and hide what

is beyond, you cannot resist the temptation to desert your own chosen

road and explore them.  You are usually paid for your trouble;

consequently, your walk inland always turns out to be one of the most

crooked, involved, purposeless, and interesting experiences a body can

imagine. There is enough of variety.  Sometimes you are in the level

open, with marshes thick grown with flag-lances that are ten feet high on

the one hand, and potato and onion orchards on the other; next, you are

on a hilltop, with the ocean and the islands spread around you; presently

the road winds through a deep cut, shut in by perpendicular walls thirty

or forty feet high, marked with the oddest and abruptest stratum lines,

suggestive of sudden and eccentric old upheavals, and garnished with here

and there a clinging adventurous flower, and here and there a dangling

vine; and by and by your way is along the sea edge, and you may look down

a fathom or two through the transparent water and watch the diamond-like

flash and play of the light upon the rocks and sands on the bottom until

you are tired of it--if you are so constituted as to be able to get tired

of it.



You may march the country roads in maiden meditation, fancy free, by

field and farm, for no dog will plunge out at you from unsuspected gate,

with breath-taking surprise of ferocious bark, notwithstanding it is a

Christian land and a civilized.  We saw upward of a million cats in

Bermuda, but the people are very abstemious in the matter of dogs.  Two

or three nights we prowled the country far and wide, and never once were

accosted by a dog.  It is a great privilege to visit such a land.  The

cats were no offense when properly distributed, but when piled they

obstructed travel.



As we entered the edge of the town that Sunday afternoon, we stopped at a

cottage to get a drink of water.  The proprietor, a middle-aged man with

a good face, asked us to sit down and rest.  His dame brought chairs, and

we grouped ourselves in the shade of the trees by the door.  Mr. Smith

--that was not his name, but it will answer--questioned us about ourselves

and our country, and we answered him truthfully, as a general thing, and

questioned him in return.  It was all very simple and pleasant and

sociable.  Rural, too; for there was a pig and a small donkey and a hen

anchored out, close at hand, by cords to their legs, on a spot that

purported to be grassy.  Presently, a woman passed along, and although

she coldly said nothing she changed the drift of our talk.  Said Smith:



"She didn't look this way, you noticed?  Well, she is our next neighbor

on one side, and there's another family that's our next neighbors on the

other side; but there's a general coolness all around now, and we don't

speak.  Yet these three families, one generation and another, have lived

here side by side and been as friendly as weavers for a hundred and fifty

years, till about a year ago."



"Why, what calamity could have been powerful enough to break up so old a

friendship?"



"Well, it was too bad, but it couldn't be helped.  It happened like this:

About a year or more ago, the rats got to pestering my place a good deal,

and I set up a steel trap in my back yard.  Both of these neighbors run

considerable to cats, and so I warned them about the trap, because their

cats were pretty sociable around here nights, and they might get into

trouble without my intending it.  Well, they shut up their cats for a

while, but you know how it is with people; they got careless, and sure

enough one night the trap took Mrs.  Jones's principal tomcat into camp

and finished him up.  In the morning Mrs. Jones comes here with the

corpse in her arms, and cries and takes on the same as if it was a child.

It was a cat by the name of Yelverton--Hector G. Yelverton--a troublesome

old rip, with no more principle than an Injun, though you couldn't make

her believe it.  I said all a man could to comfort her, but no, nothing

would do but I must pay for him.  Finally, I said I warn't investing in

cats now as much as I was, and with that she walked off in a huff,

carrying the remains with her.  That closed our intercourse with the

Joneses.  Mrs. Jones joined another church and took her tribe with her.

She said she would not hold fellowship with assassins.  Well, by and by

comes Mrs. Brown's turn--she that went by here a minute ago.  She had a

disgraceful old yellow cat that she thought as much of as if he was

twins, and one night he tried that trap on his neck, and it fitted him

so, and was so sort of satisfactory, that he laid down and curled up and

stayed with it.  Such was the end of Sir John Baldwin."



"Was that the name of the cat?"



"The same.  There's cats around here with names that would surprise you.

Maria" (to his wife), "what was that cat's name that eat a keg of

ratsbane by mistake over at Hooper's, and started home and got struck by

lightning and took the blind staggers and fell in the well and was 'most

drowned before they could fish him out?"



"That was that colored Deacon Jackson's cat.  I only remember the last

end of its name, which was Hold-The-Fort-For-I-Am-Coming Jackson."



"Sho! that ain't the one.  That's the one that eat up an entire box of

Seidlitz powders, and then hadn't any more judgment than to go and take a

drink.  He was considered to be a great loss, but I never could see it.

Well, no matter about the names.  Mrs. Brown wanted to be reasonable, but

Mrs. Jones wouldn't let her.  She put her up to going to law for damages.

So to law she went, and had the face to claim seven shillings and

sixpence.  It made a great stir.  All the neighbors went to court.

Everybody took sides.  It got hotter and hotter, and broke up all the

friendships for three hundred yards around friendships that had lasted

for generations and generations.



"Well, I proved by eleven witnesses that the cat was of a low character

and very ornery, and warn't worth a canceled postage-stamp, anyway,

taking the average of cats here; but I lost the case.  What could I

expect?  The system is all wrong here, and is bound to make revolution

and bloodshed some day.  You see, they give the magistrate a poor little

starvation salary, and then turn him loose on the public to gouge for

fees and costs to live on.  What is the natural result?  Why, he never

looks into the justice of a case--never once.  All he looks at is which

client has got the money.  So this one piled the fees and costs and

everything on to me.  I could pay specie, don't you see? and he knew

mighty well that if he put the verdict on to Mrs. Brown, where it

belonged, he'd have to take his swag in currency."



"Currency?  Why, has Bermuda a currency?"



"Yes--onions.  And they were forty per cent. discount, too, then, because

the season had been over as much as three months.  So I lost my case.

I had to pay for that cat.  But the general trouble the case made was the

worst thing about it.  Broke up so much good feeling.  The neighbors

don't speak to each other now.  Mrs. Brown had named a child after me.

But she changed its name right away.  She is a Baptist.  Well, in the

course of baptizing it over again it got drowned.  I was hoping we might

get to be friendly again some time or other, but of course this drowning

the child knocked that all out of the question.  It would have saved a

world of heartbreak and ill blood if she had named it dry."



I knew by the sigh that this was honest.  All this trouble and all this

destruction of confidence in the purity of the bench on account of a

seven-shilling lawsuit about a cat!  Somehow, it seemed to "size" the

country.



At this point we observed that an English flag had just been placed at

half-mast on a building a hundred yards away.  I and my friends were busy

in an instant trying to imagine whose death, among the island

dignitaries, could command such a mark of respect as this.  Then a

shudder shook them and me at the same moment, and I knew that we had

jumped to one and the same conclusion: "The governor has gone to England;

it is for the British admiral!"



At this moment Mr. Smith noticed the flag.  He said with emotion:



"That's on a boarding-house.  I judge there's a boarder dead."



A dozen other flags within view went to half-mast.



"It's a boarder, sure," said Smith.



"But would they half-mast the flags here for a boarder, Mr. Smith?"



"Why, certainly they would, if he was dead."



That seemed to size the country again.







IV



The early twilight of a Sunday evening in Hamilton, Bermuda, is an

alluring time.  There is just enough of whispering breeze, fragrance of

flowers, and sense of repose to raise one's thoughts heavenward; and just

enough amateur piano music to keep him reminded of the other place.

There are many venerable pianos in Hamilton, and they all play at

twilight.  Age enlarges and enriches the powers of some musical

instruments--notably those of the violin--but it seems to set a piano's

teeth on edge.  Most of the music in vogue there is the same that those

pianos prattled in their innocent infancy; and there is something very

pathetic about it when they go over it now, in their asthmatic second

childhood, dropping a note here and there where a tooth is gone.



We attended evening service at the stately Episcopal church on the hill,

where five or six hundred people, half of them white and the other half

black, according to the usual Bermudian proportions; and all well

dressed--a thing which is also usual in Bermuda and to be confidently

expected.  There was good music, which we heard, and doubtless--a good

sermon, but there was a wonderful deal of coughing, and so only the high

parts of the argument carried over it.  As we came out, after service,

I overheard one young girl say to another:



"Why, you don't mean to say you pay duty on gloves and laces!  I only pay

postage; have them done up and sent in the Boston Advertiser."



There are those that believe that the most difficult thing to create is

a woman who can comprehend that it is wrong to smuggle; and that an

impossible thing to create is a woman who will not smuggle, whether or

no, when she gets a chance.  But these may be errors.



We went wandering off toward the country, and were soon far down in the

lonely black depths of a road that was roofed over with the dense foliage

of a double rank of great cedars.  There was no sound of any kind there;

it was perfectly still.  And it was so dark that one could detect nothing

but somber outlines.  We strode farther and farther down this tunnel,

cheering the way with chat.



Presently the chat took this shape: "How insensibly the character of the

people and of a government makes its impress upon a stranger, and gives

him a sense of security or of insecurity without his taking deliberate

thought upon the matter or asking anybody a question!  We have been in

this land half a day; we have seen none but honest faces; we have noted

the British flag flying, which means efficient government and good order;

so without inquiry we plunge unarmed and with perfect confidence into

this dismal place, which in almost any other country would swarm with

thugs and garroters--"



'Sh!  What was that?  Stealthy footsteps!  Low voices!  We gasp, we close

up together, and wait.  A vague shape glides out of the dusk and

confronts us.  A voice speaks--demands money!



"A shilling, gentlemen, if you please, to help build the new Methodist

church."



Blessed sound!  Holy sound!  We contribute with thankful avidity to the

new Methodist church, and are happy to think how lucky it was that those

little colored Sunday-school scholars did not seize upon everything we

had with violence, before we recovered from our momentary helpless

condition.  By the light of cigars we write down the names of weightier

philanthropists than ourselves on the contribution cards, and then pass

on into the farther darkness, saying, What sort of a government do they

call this, where they allow little black pious children, with

contribution cards, to plunge out upon peaceable strangers in the dark

and scare them to death?



We prowled on several hours, sometimes by the seaside, sometimes inland,

and finally managed to get lost, which is a feat that requires talent in

Bermuda.  I had on new shoes.  They were No. 7's when I started, but were

not more than 5's now, and still diminishing.  I walked two hours in

those shoes after that, before we reached home.  Doubtless I could have

the reader's sympathy for the asking.  Many people have never had the

headache or the toothache, and I am one of those myself; but every body

has worn tight shoes for two or three hours, and known the luxury of

taking them off in a retired place and seeing his feet swell up and

obscure the firmament.  Once when I was a callow, bashful cub, I took a

plain, unsentimental country girl to a comedy one night.  I had known her

a day; she seemed divine; I wore my new boots.  At the end of the first

half-hour she said, "Why do you fidget so with your feet?"  I said, "Did

I?"  Then I put my attention there and kept still.  At the end of another

half-hour she said, "Why do you say, 'Yes, oh yes!' and 'Ha, ha, oh,

certainly! very true!' to everything I say, when half the time those are

entirely irrelevant answers?"  I blushed, and explained that I had been a

little absent-minded.  At the end of another half-hour she said, "Please,

why do you grin so steadfastly at vacancy, and yet look so sad?"

I explained that I always did that when I was reflecting.  An hour

passed, and then she turned and contemplated me with her earnest eyes and

said, "Why do you cry all the time?"  I explained that very funny

comedies always made me cry.  At last human nature surrendered, and I

secretly slipped my boots off.  This was a mistake.  I was not able to

get them on any more.  It was a rainy night; there were no omnibuses

going our way; and as I walked home, burning up with shame, with the girl

on one arm and my boots under the other, I was an object worthy of some

compassion--especially in those moments of martyrdom when I had to pass

through the glare that fell upon the pavement from street-lamps.

Finally, this child of the forest said, "Where are your boots?" and being

taken unprepared, I put a fitting finish to the follies of the evening

with the stupid remark, "The higher classes do not wear them to the

theater."



The Reverend had been an army chaplain during the war, and while we were

hunting for a road that would lead to Hamilton he told a story about two

dying soldiers which interested me in spite of my feet.  He said that in

the Potomac hospitals rough pine coffins were furnished by government,

but that it was not always possible to keep up with the demand; so, when

a man died, if there was no coffin at hand he was buried without one.

One night, late, two soldiers lay dying in a ward.  A man came in with a

coffin on his shoulder, and stood trying to make up his mind which of

these two poor fellows would be likely to need it first.  Both of them

begged for it with their fading eyes--they were past talking.  Then one

of them protruded a wasted hand from his blankets and made a feeble

beckoning sign with the fingers, to signify, "Be a good fellow; put it

under my bed, please."  The man did it, and left.  The lucky soldier

painfully turned himself in his bed until he faced the other warrior,

raised himself partly on his elbow, and began to work up a mysterious

expression of some kind in his face.  Gradually, irksomely, but surely

and steadily, it developed, and at last it took definite form as a pretty

successful wink.  The sufferer fell back exhausted with his labor, but

bathed in glory.  Now entered a personal friend of No. 2, the despoiled

soldier.  No. 2 pleaded with him with eloquent eyes, till presently he

understood, and removed the coffin from under No. 1's bed and put it

under No. 2's.  No. 2 indicated his joy, and made some more signs; the

friend understood again, and put his arm under No. 2's shoulders and

lifted him partly up.  Then the dying hero turned the dim exultation of

his eye upon No. 1, and began a slow and labored work with his hands;

gradually he lifted one hand up toward his face; it grew weak and dropped

back again; once more he made the effort, but failed again.  He took a

rest; he gathered all the remnant of his strength, and this time he

slowly but surely carried his thumb to the side of his nose, spread the

gaunt fingers wide in triumph, and dropped back dead.  That picture

sticks by me yet.  The "situation" is unique.



The next morning, at what seemed a very early hour, the little white

table-waiter appeared suddenly in my room and shot a single word out of

himself "Breakfast!"



This was a remarkable boy in many ways.  He was about eleven years old;

he had alert, intent black eyes; he was quick of movement; there was no

hesitation, no uncertainty about him anywhere; there was a military

decision in his lip, his manner, his speech, that was an astonishing

thing to see in a little chap like him; he wasted no words; his answers

always came so quick and brief that they seemed to be part of the

question that had been asked instead of a reply to it.  When he stood at

table with his fly-brush, rigid, erect, his face set in a cast-iron

gravity, he was a statue till he detected a dawning want in somebody's

eye; then he pounced down, supplied it, and was instantly a statue again.

When he was sent to the kitchen for anything, he marched upright till he

got to the door; he turned hand-springs the rest of the way.



"Breakfast!"



I thought I would make one more effort to get some conversation out of

this being.



"Have you called the Reverend, or are--"



"Yes s'r!"



"Is it early, or is--"



"Eight-five."



"Do you have to do all the 'chores,' or is there somebody to give

you a--"



"Colored girl."



"Is there only one parish in this island, or are there--"



"Eight!"



"Is the big church on the hill a parish church, or is it--"



"Chapel-of-ease!"



"Is taxation here classified into poll, parish, town, and--"



"Don't know!"



Before I could cudgel another question out of my head, he was below,

hand-springing across the back yard.  He had slid down the balusters,

headfirst.  I gave up trying to provoke a discussion with him.  The

essential element of discussion had been left out of him; his answers

were so final and exact that they did not leave a doubt to hang

conversation on.  I suspect that there is the making of a mighty man or a

mighty rascal in this boy--according to circumstances--but they are going

to apprentice him to a carpenter.  It is the way the world uses its

opportunities.



During this day and the next we took carriage drives about the island and

over to the town of St. George's, fifteen or twenty miles away.  Such

hard, excellent roads to drive over are not to be found elsewhere out of

Europe.  An intelligent young colored man drove us, and acted as

guide-book.  In the edge of the town we saw five or six mountain-cabbage

palms (atrocious name!) standing in a straight row, and equidistant from

each other.  These were not the largest or the tallest trees I have ever

seen, but they were the stateliest, the most majestic.  That row of them

must be the nearest that nature has ever come to counterfeiting a

colonnade. These trees are all the same height, say sixty feet; the

trunks as gray as granite, with a very gradual and perfect taper; without

sign of branch or knot or flaw; the surface not looking like bark, but

like granite that has been dressed and not polished.  Thus all the way up

the diminishing shaft for fifty feet; then it begins to take the

appearance of being closely wrapped, spool-fashion, with gray cord, or of

having been turned in a lathe.  Above this point there is an outward

swell, and thence upward for six feet or more the cylinder is a bright,

fresh green, and is formed of wrappings like those of an ear of green

Indian corn.  Then comes the great, spraying palm plume, also green.

Other palm trees always lean out of the perpendicular, or have a curve in

them.  But the plumb-line could not detect a deflection in any individual

of this stately row; they stand as straight as the colonnade of Baalbec;

they have its great height, they have its gracefulness, they have its

dignity; in moonlight or twilight, and shorn of their plumes, they would

duplicate it.



The birds we came across in the country were singularly tame; even that

wild creature, the quail, would pick around in the grass at ease while we

inspected it and talked about it at leisure.  A small bird of the canary

species had to be stirred up with the butt-end of the whip before it

would move, and then it moved only a couple of feet.  It is said that

even the suspicious flea is tame and sociable in Bermuda, and will allow

himself to be caught and caressed without misgivings.  This should be

taken with allowance, for doubtless there is more or less brag about it.

In San Francisco they used to claim that their native flea could kick a

child over, as if it were a merit in a flea to be able to do that; as if

the knowledge of it trumpeted abroad ought to entice immigration.  Such a

thing in nine cases out of ten would be almost sure to deter a thinking

man from coming.



We saw no bugs or reptiles to speak of, and so I was thinking of saying

in print, in a general way, that there were none at all; but one night

after I had gone to bed, the Reverend came into my room carrying

something, and asked, "Is this your boot?"  I said it was, and he said he

had met a spider going off with it.  Next morning he stated that just at

dawn the same spider raised his window and was coming in to get a shirt,

but saw him and fled.



I inquired, "Did he get the shirt?"



"No."



"How did you know it was a shirt he was after?"



"I could see it in his eye."



We inquired around, but could hear of no Bermudian spider capable of

doing these things.  Citizens said that their largest spiders could not

more than spread their legs over an ordinary saucer, and that they had

always been considered honest.  Here was testimony of a clergyman against

the testimony of mere worldlings--interested ones, too.  On the whole, I

judged it best to lock up my things.



Here and there on the country roads we found lemon, papaw, orange, lime,

and fig trees; also several sorts of palms, among them the cocoa, the

date, and the palmetto.  We saw some bamboos forty feet high, with stems

as thick as a man's arm.  Jungles of the mangrove tree stood up out of

swamps; propped on their interlacing roots as upon a tangle of stilts.

In drier places the noble tamarind sent down its grateful cloud of shade.

Here and there the blossomy tamarisk adorned the roadside.  There was a

curious gnarled and twisted black tree, without a single leaf on it.

It might have passed itself off for a dead apple tree but for the fact

that it had a a star-like, red-hot flower sprinkled sparsely over its

person.  It had the scattery red glow that a constellation might have

when glimpsed through smoked glass.  It is possible that our

constellations have been so constructed as to be invisible through smoked

glass; if this is so it is a great mistake.



We saw a tree that bears grapes, and just as calmly and unostentatiously

as a vine would do it.  We saw an India-rubber tree, but out of season,

possibly, so there were no shoes on it, nor suspenders, nor anything that

a person would properly expect to find there.  This gave it an

impressively fraudulent look.  There was exactly one mahogany tree on the

island.  I know this to be reliable, because I saw a man who said he had

counted it many a time and could not be mistaken.  He was a man with a

harelip and a pure heart, and everybody said he was as true as steel.

Such men are all too few.



One's eye caught near and far the pink cloud of the oleander and the

red blaze of the pomegranate blossom.  In one piece of wild wood the

morning-glory vines had wrapped the trees to their very tops, and

decorated them all over with couples and clusters of great bluebells--a

fine and striking spectacle, at a little distance.  But the dull cedar is

everywhere, and is the prevailing foliage.  One does not appreciate how

dull it is until the varnished, bright green attire of the infrequent

lemon tree pleasantly intrudes its contrast.  In one thing Bermuda is

eminently tropical--was in May, at least--the unbrilliant, slightly

faded, unrejoicing look of the landscape.  For forests arrayed in a

blemishless magnificence of glowing green foliage that seems to exult in

its own existence and can move the beholder to an enthusiasm that will

make him either shout or cry, one must go to countries that have

malignant winters.



We saw scores of colored farmers digging their crops of potatoes and

onions, their wives and children helping--entirely contented and

comfortable, if looks go for anything.  We never met a man, or woman, or

child anywhere in this sunny island who seemed to be unprosperous, or

discontented, or sorry about anything.  This sort of monotony became very

tiresome presently, and even something worse.  The spectacle of an entire

nation groveling in contentment is an infuriating thing.  We felt the

lack of something in this community--a vague, an indefinable, an elusive

something, and yet a lack.  But after considerable thought we made out

what it was--tramps.  Let them go there, right now, in a body.  It is

utterly virgin soil.  Passage is cheap.  Every true patriot in America

will help buy tickets.  Whole armies of these excellent beings can be

spared from our midst and our polls; they will find a delicious climate

and a green, kind-hearted people.  There are potatoes and onions for all,

and a generous welcome for the first batch that arrives, and elegant

graves for the second.



It was the Early Rose potato the people were digging.  Later in the year

they have another crop, which they call the Garnet.  We buy their

potatoes (retail) at fifteen dollars a barrel; and those colored farmers

buy ours for a song, and live on them.  Havana might exchange cigars with

Connecticut in the same advantageous way, if she thought of it.



We passed a roadside grocery with a sign up, "Potatoes Wanted."  An

ignorant stranger, doubtless.  He could not have gone thirty steps from

his place without finding plenty of them.



In several fields the arrowroot crop was already sprouting.  Bermuda used

to make a vast annual profit out of this staple before firearms came into

such general use.



The island is not large.  Somewhere in the interior a man ahead of us had

a very slow horse.  I suggested that we had better go by him; but the

driver said the man had but a little way to go.  I waited to see,

wondering how he could know.  Presently the man did turn down another

road.  I asked, "How did you know he would?"



"Because I knew the man, and where he lived."



I asked him, satirically, if he knew everybody in the island; he

answered, very simply, that he did.  This gives a body's mind a good

substantial grip on the dimensions of the place.



At the principal hotel at St. George's, a young girl, with a sweet,

serious face, said we could not be furnished with dinner, because we had

not been expected, and no preparation had been made.  Yet it was still an

hour before dinner-time.  We argued, she yielded not; we supplicated, she

was serene.  The hotel had not been expecting an inundation of two

people, and so it seemed that we should have to go home dinnerless.

I said we were not very hungry a fish would do.  My little maid answered,

it was not the market-day for fish.  Things began to look serious; but

presently the boarder who sustained the hotel came in, and when the case

was laid before him he was cheerfully willing to divide.  So we had much

pleasant chat at table about St. George's chief industry, the repairing

of damaged ships; and in between we had a soup that had something in it

that seemed to taste like the hereafter, but it proved to be only pepper

of a particularly vivacious kind.  And we had an iron-clad chicken that

was deliciously cooked, but not in the right way.  Baking was not the

thing to convince this sort.  He ought to have been put through a

quartz-mill until the "tuck" was taken out of him, and then boiled till

we came again.  We got a good deal of sport out of him, but not enough

sustenance to leave the victory on our side.  No matter; we had potatoes

and a pie and a sociable good time.  Then a ramble through the town,

which is a quaint one, with interesting, crooked streets, and narrow,

crooked lanes, with here and there a grain of dust.  Here, as in

Hamilton, the dwellings had Venetian blinds of a very sensible pattern.

They were not double shutters, hinged at the sides, but a single broad

shutter, hinged at the top; you push it outward, from the bottom, and

fasten it at any angle required by the sun or desired by yourself.



All about the island one sees great white scars on the hill-slopes.

These are dished spaces where the soil has been scraped off and the coral

exposed and glazed with hard whitewash.  Some of these are a quarter-acre

in size.  They catch and carry the rainfall to reservoirs; for the wells

are few and poor, and there are no natural springs and no brooks.



They say that the Bermuda climate is mild and equable, with never any

snow or ice, and that one may be very comfortable in spring clothing the

year round, there.  We had delightful and decided summer weather in May,

with a flaming sun that permitted the thinnest of raiment, and yet there

was a constant breeze; consequently we were never discomforted by heat.

At four or five in the afternoon the mercury began to go down, and then

it became necessary to change to thick garments.  I went to St. George's

in the morning clothed in the thinnest of linen, and reached home at five

in the afternoon with two overcoats on.  The nights are said to be always

cool and bracing.  We had mosquito-nets, and the Reverend said the

mosquitoes persecuted him a good deal.  I often heard him slapping and

banging at these imaginary creatures with as much zeal as if they had

been real.  There are no mosquitoes in the Bermudas in May.



The poet Thomas Moore spent several months in Bermuda more than seventy

years ago.  He was sent out to be registrar of the admiralty.  I am not

quite clear as to the function of a registrar of the admiralty of

Bermuda, but I think it is his duty to keep a record of all the admirals

born there.  I will inquire into this.  There was not much doing in

admirals, and Moore got tired and went away.  A reverently preserved

souvenir of him is still one of the treasures of the islands: I gathered

the idea, vaguely, that it was a jug, but was persistently thwarted in

the twenty-two efforts I made to visit it.  However, it was no matter,

for I found out afterward that it was only a chair.



There are several "sights" in the Bermudas, of course, but they are

easily avoided.  This is a great advantage--one cannot have it in Europe.

Bermuda is the right country for a jaded man to "loaf" in.  There are no

harassments; the deep peace and quiet of the country sink into one's body

and bones and give his conscience a rest, and chloroform the legion of

invisible small devils that are always trying to whitewash his hair.

A good many Americans go there about the first of March and remain until

the early spring weeks have finished their villainies at home.



The Bermudians are hoping soon to have telegraphic communication with the

world.  But even after they shall have acquired this curse it will still

be a good country to go to for a vacation, for there are charming little

islets scattered about the inclosed sea where one could live secure from

interruption.  The telegraph-boy would have to come in a boat, and one

could easily kill him while he was making his landing.



We had spent four days in Bermuda--three bright ones out of doors and one

rainy one in the house, we being disappointed about getting a yacht for a

sail; and now our furlough was ended, and we entered into the ship again

and sailed homeward.



We made the run home to New York quarantine in three days and five hours,

and could have gone right along up to the city if we had had a health

permit.  But health permits are not granted after seven in the evening,

partly because a ship cannot be inspected and overhauled with exhaustive,

thoroughness except in daylight, and partly because health-officers are

liable to catch cold if they expose themselves to the night air.  Still,

you can buy a permit after hours for five dollars extra, and the officer

will do the inspecting next week.  Our ship and passengers lay under

expense and in humiliating captivity all night, under the very nose of

the little official reptile who is supposed to protect New York from

pestilence by his vigilant "inspections."  This imposing rigor gave

everybody a solemn and awful idea of the beneficent watchfulness of our

government, and there were some who wondered if anything finer could be

found in other countries.



In the morning we were all a-tiptoe to witness the intricate ceremony

of inspecting the ship.  But it was a disappointing thing.  The

health-officer's tug ranged alongside for a moment, our purser handed the

lawful three-dollar permit fee to the health-officer's bootblack, who

passed us a folded paper in a forked stick, and away we went.  The entire

"inspection" did not occupy thirteen seconds.



The health-officer's place is worth a hundred thousand dollars a year to

him.  His system of inspection is perfect, and therefore cannot be

improved on; but it seems to me that his system of collecting his fees

might be amended.  For a great ship to lie idle all night is a most

costly loss of time; for her passengers to have to do the same thing

works to them the same damage, with the addition of an amount of

exasperation and bitterness of soul that the spectacle of that

health-officer's ashes on a shovel could hardly sweeten.  Now why would

it not be better and simpler to let the ships pass in unmolested, and the

fees and permits be exchanged once a year by post.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Some Rambling Notes of an Idle

Excursion, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













THE STOLEN WHITE ELEPHANT



by Mark Twain







[Left out of A Tramp Abroad, because it was feared that some of the

particulars had been exaggerated, and that others were not true.  Before

these suspicions had been proven groundless, the book had gone to press.

--M.  T.]







The following curious history was related to me by a chance railway

acquaintance.  He was a gentleman more than seventy years of age, and his

thoroughly good and gentle face and earnest and sincere manner imprinted

the unmistakable stamp of truth upon every statement which fell from his

lips.  He said:



You know in what reverence the royal white elephant of Siam is held by

the people of that country.  You know it is sacred to kings, only kings

may possess it, and that it is, indeed, in a measure even superior to

kings, since it receives not merely honor but worship.  Very well; five

years ago, when the troubles concerning the frontier line arose between

Great Britain and Siam, it was presently manifest that Siam had been in

the wrong.  Therefore every reparation was quickly made, and the British

representative stated that he was satisfied and the past should be

forgotten.  This greatly relieved the King of Siam, and partly as a token

of gratitude, partly also, perhaps, to wipe out any little remaining

vestige of unpleasantness which England might feel toward him, he wished

to send the Queen a present--the sole sure way of propitiating an enemy,

according to Oriental ideas.  This present ought not only to be a royal

one, but transcendently royal.  Wherefore, what offering could be so meet

as that of a white elephant?  My position in the Indian civil service was

such that I was deemed peculiarly worthy of the honor of conveying the

present to her Majesty.  A ship was fitted out for me and my servants and

the officers and attendants of the elephant, and in due time I arrived in

New York harbor and placed my royal charge in admirable quarters in

Jersey City.  It was necessary to remain awhile in order to recruit the

animal's health before resuming the voyage.



All went well during a fortnight--then my calamities began.  The white

elephant was stolen!  I was called up at dead of night and informed of

this fearful misfortune.  For some moments I was beside myself with

terror and anxiety; I was helpless.  Then I grew calmer and collected my

faculties.  I soon saw my course--for, indeed, there was but the one

course for an intelligent man to pursue.  Late as it was, I flew to New

York and got a policeman to conduct me to the headquarters of the

detective force.  Fortunately I arrived in time, though the chief of the

force, the celebrated Inspector Blunt was just on the point of leaving

for his home.  He was a man of middle size and compact frame, and when he

was thinking deeply he had a way of kniting his brows and tapping his

forehead reflectively with his finger, which impressed you at once with

the conviction that you stood in the presence of a person of no common

order.  The very sight of him gave me confidence and made me hopeful.

I stated my errand.  It did not flurry him in the least; it had no more

visible effect upon his iron self-possession than if I had told him

somebody had stolen my dog.  He motioned me to a seat, and said, calmly:



"Allow me to think a moment, please."



So saying, he sat down at his office table and leaned his head upon his

hand.  Several clerks were at work at the other end of the room; the

scratching of their pens was all the sound I heard during the next six or

seven minutes.  Meantime the inspector sat there, buried in thought.

Finally he raised his head, and there was that in the firm lines of his

face which showed me that his brain had done its work and his plan was

made.  Said he--and his voice was low and impressive:



"This is no ordinary case.  Every step must be warily taken; each step

must be made sure before the next is ventured.  And secrecy must be

observed--secrecy profound and absolute.  Speak to no one about the

matter, not even the reporters.  I will take care of them; I will see

that they get only what it may suit my ends to let them know."  He

touched a bell; a youth appeared.  "Alaric, tell the reporters to remain

for the present."  The boy retired.  "Now let us proceed to business--and

systematically.  Nothing can be accomplished in this trade of mine

without strict and minute method."



He took a pen and some paper.  "Now--name of the elephant?"



"Hassan Ben Ali Ben Selim Abdallah Mohammed Moist Alhammal

Jamsetjejeebhoy Dhuleep Sultan Ebu Bhudpoor."



"Very well.  Given name?"



"Jumbo."



"Very well.  Place of birth?"



"The capital city of Siam."



"Parents living?"



"No--dead."



"Had they any other issue besides this one?"



"None.  He was an only child."



"Very well.  These matters are sufficient under that head.  Now please

describe the elephant, and leave out no particular, however

insignificant--that is, insignificant from your point of view.  To me in

my profession there are no insignificant particulars; they do not exist."



I described he wrote.  When I was done, he said:



"Now listen.  If I have made any mistakes, correct me."



He read as follows:



"Height, 19 feet; length from apex of forehead insertion of tail, 26

feet; length of trunk, 16 feet; length of tail, 6 feet; total length,

including trunk, and tail, 48 feet; length of tusks, 9 feet; ears

keeping with these dimensions; footprint resembles the mark left when one

up-ends a barrel in the snow; the color of the elephant, a dull white;

has a hole the size of a plate in each ear for the insertion of jewelry

and possesses the habit in a remarkable degree of squirting water upon

spectators and of maltreating with his trunk not only such persons as he

is acquainted with, but even entire strangers; limps slightly with his

right hind leg, and has a small scar in his left armpit caused by a

former boil; had on, when stolen, a castle containing seats for fifteen

persons, and a gold-cloth saddle-blanket the size of an ordinary carpet."



There were no mistakes.  The inspector touched the bell, handed the

description to Alaric, and said:



"Have fifty thousand copies of this printed at once and mailed to every

detective office and pawnbroker's shop on the continent."  Alaric

retired.  "There--so far, so good.  Next, I must have a photograph of the

property."



I gave him one.  He examined it critically, and said:



"It must do, since we can do no better; but he has his trunk curled up

and tucked into his mouth.  That is unfortunate, and is calculated to

mislead, for of course he does not usually have it in that position."

He touched his bell.



"Alaric, have fifty thousand copies of this photograph made the first

thing in the morning, and mail them with the descriptive circulars."



Alaric retired to execute his orders.  The inspector said:



"It will be necessary to offer a reward, of course.  Now as to the

amount?"



"What sum would you suggest?"



"To begin with, I should say--well, twenty-five thousand dollars.  It is

an intricate and difficult business; there are a thousand avenues of

escape and opportunities of concealment.  These thieves have friends and

pals everywhere--"



"Bless me, do you know who they are?"



The wary face, practised in concealing the thoughts and feelings within,

gave me no token, nor yet the replying words, so quietly uttered:



"Never mind about that.  I may, and I may not.  We generally gather a

pretty shrewd inkling of who our man is by the manner of his work and the

size of the game he goes after.  We are not dealing with a pickpocket or

a hall thief now, make up your mind to that.  This property was not

'lifted' by a novice.  But, as I was saying, considering the amount of

travel which will have to be done, and the diligence with which the

thieves will cover up their traces as they move along, twenty-five

thousand may be too small a sum to offer, yet I think it worth while to

start with that."



So we determined upon that figure as a beginning.  Then this man, whom

nothing escaped which could by any possibility be made to serve as a

clue, said:



"There are cases in detective history to show that criminals have been

detected through peculiarities, in their appetites.  Now, what does this

elephant eat, and how much?"



"Well, as to what he eats--he will eat anything.  He will eat a man, he

will eat a Bible--he will eat anything between a man and a Bible."



"Good very good, indeed, but too general.  Details are necessary--details

are the only valuable things in our trade.  Very well--as to men.  At one

meal--or, if you prefer, during one day--how man men will he eat, if

fresh?"



"He would not care whether they were fresh or not; at a single meal he

would eat five ordinary men.



"Very good; five men; we will put that down.  What nationalities would he

prefer?"



"He is indifferent about nationalities.  He prefers acquaintances, but is

not prejudiced against strangers."



"Very good.  Now, as to Bibles.  How many Bibles would he eat at a meal?"



"He would eat an entire edition."



"It is hardly succinct enough.  Do you mean the ordinary octavo, or the

family illustrated?"



"I think he would be indifferent to illustrations that is, I think he

would not value illustrations above simple letterpress."



"No, you do not get my idea.  I refer to bulk.  The ordinary octavo Bible

weighs about two pound; and a half, while the great quarto with the

illustrations weighs ten or twelve.  How many Dore Bibles would he eat at

a meal?"



"If you knew this elephant, you could not ask.  He would take what they

had."



"Well, put it in dollars and cents, then.  We must get at it somehow.

The Dore costs a hundred dollars a copy, Russia leather, beveled."



"He would require about fifty thousand dollars worth--say an edition of

five hundred copies."



"Now that is more exact.  I will put that down.  Very well; he likes men

and Bibles; so far, so good.  What else will he eat?  I want

particulars."



"He will leave Bibles to eat bricks, he will leave bricks to eat bottles,

he will leave bottles to eat clothing, he will leave clothing to eat

cats, he will leave cats to eat oysters, he will leave oysters to eat

ham, he will leave ham to eat sugar, he will leave sugar to eat pie, he

will leave pie to eat potatoes, he will leave potatoes to eat bran; he

will leave bran to eat hay, he will leave hay to eat oats, he will leave

oats to eat rice, for he was mainly raised on it.  There is nothing

whatever that he will not eat but European butter, and he would eat that

if he could taste it."



"Very good.  General quantity at a meal--say about--"



"Well, anywhere from a quarter to half a ton."



"And he drinks--"



"Everything that is fluid.  Milk, water, whisky, molasses, castor oil,

camphene, carbolic acid--it is no use to go into particulars; whatever

fluid occurs to you set it down.  He will drink anything that is fluid,

except European coffee."



"Very good.  As to quantity?"



"Put it down five to fifteen barrels--his thirst varies; his other

appetites do not."



"These things are unusual.  They ought to furnish quite good clues toward

tracing him."



He touched the bell.



"Alaric; summon Captain Burns."



Burns appeared.  Inspector Blunt unfolded the whole matter to him, detail

by detail.  Then he said in the clear, decisive tones of a man whose

plans are clearly defined in his head and who is accustomed to command:



"Captain Burns, detail Detectives Jones, Davis, Halsey, Bates, and

Hackett to shadow the elephant."



"Yes, sir."



"Detail Detectives Moses, Dakin, Murphy, Rogers, Tupper, Higgins, and

Bartholomew to shadow the thieves."



"Yes, sir."



"Place a strong guard--A guard of thirty picked men, with a relief of

thirty--over the place from whence the elephant was stolen, to keep

strict watch there night and day, and allow none to approach--except

reporters--without written authority from me."



"Yes, sir."



"Place detectives in plain clothes in the railway; steamship, and ferry

depots, and upon all roadways leading out of Jersey City, with orders to

search all suspicious persons."



"Yes, sir."



"Furnish all these men with photograph and accompanying description of

the elephant, and instruct them to search all trains and outgoing

ferryboats and other vessels."



"Yes, sir."



"If the elephant should be found, let him be seized, and the information

forwarded to me by telegraph."



"Yes, sir."



"Let me be informed at once if any clues should be found footprints of

the animal, or anything of that kind."



"Yes, sir."



"Get an order commanding the harbor police to patrol the frontages

vigilantly."



"Yes, sir."



"Despatch detectives in plain clothes over all the railways, north as far

as Canada, west as far as Ohio, south as far as Washington."



"Yes, sir."



"Place experts in all the telegraph offices to listen in to all messages;

and let them require that all cipher despatches be interpreted to them."



"Yes, sir."



"Let all these things be done with the utmost's secrecy--mind, the most

impenetrable secrecy."



"Yes, sir."



"Report to me promptly at the usual hour."



"Yes, Sir."



"Go!"



"Yes, sir."



He was gone.



Inspector Blunt was silent and thoughtful a moment, while the fire in his

eye cooled down and faded out.  Then he turned to me and said in a placid

voice:



"I am not given to boasting, it is not my habit; but--we shall find the

elephant."



I shook him warmly by the hand and thanked him; and I felt my thanks,

too.  The more I had seen of the man the more I liked him and the more I

admired him and marveled over the mysterious wonders of his profession.

Then we parted for the night, and I went home with a far happier heart

than I had carried with me to his office.





II



Next morning it was all in the newspapers, in the minutest detail.  It

even had additions--consisting of Detective This, Detective That, and

Detective The Other's "Theory" as to how the robbery was done, who the

robbers were, and whither they had flown with their booty.  There were

eleven of these theories, and they covered all the possibilities; and

this single fact shows what independent thinkers detectives are.  No two

theories were alike, or even much resembled each other, save in one

striking particular, and in that one all the other eleven theories were

absolutely agreed.  That was, that although the rear of my building was

torn out and the only door remained locked, the elephant had not been

removed through the rent, but by some other (undiscovered) outlet.

All agreed that the robbers had made that rent only to mislead the

detectives.  That never would have occurred to me or to any other layman,

perhaps, but it had not deceived the detectives for a moment.  Thus, what

I had supposed was the only thing that had no mystery about it was in

fact the very thing I had gone furthest astray in.  The eleven theories

all named the supposed robbers, but no two named the same robbers; the

total number of suspected persons was thirty-seven.  The various

newspaper accounts all closed with the most important opinion of all

--that of Chief Inspector Blunt.  A portion of this statement read as

follows:



     The chief knows who the two principals are, namely, "Brick" Daffy

     and "Red" McFadden.  Ten days before the robbery was achieved he was

     already aware that it was to be attempted, and had quietly proceeded

     to shadow these two noted villains; but unfortunately on the night

     in question their track was lost, and before it could be found again

     the bird was flown--that is, the elephant.



     Daffy and McFadden are the boldest scoundrels in the profession; the

     chief has reasons for believing that they are the men who stole the

     stove out of the detective headquarters on a bitter night last

     winter--in consequence of which the chief and every detective

     present were in the hands of the physicians before morning, some

     with frozen feet, others with frozen fingers, ears, and other

     members.



When I read the first half of that I was more astonished than ever at the

wonderful sagacity of this strange man.  He not only saw everything in

the present with a clear eye, but even the future could not be hidden

from him.  I was soon at his office, and said I could not help wishing he

had had those men arrested, and so prevented the trouble and loss; but

his reply was simple and unanswerable:



"It is not our province to prevent crime, but to punish it.  We cannot

punish it until it is committed."



I remarked that the secrecy with which we had begun had been marred by

the newspapers; not only all our facts but all our plans and purposes had

been revealed; even all the suspected persons had been named; these would

doubtless disguise themselves now, or go into hiding.



"Let them.  They will find that when I am ready for them my hand will

descend upon them, in their secret places, as unerringly as the hand of

fate.  As to the newspapers, we must keep in with them.  Fame,

reputation, constant public mention--these are the detective's bread and

butter.  He must publish his facts, else he will be supposed to have

none; he must publish his theory, for nothing is so strange or striking

as a detective's theory, or brings him so much wonderful respect; we must

publish our plans, for these the journals insist upon having, and we

could not deny them without offending.  We must constantly show the

public what we are doing, or they will believe we are doing nothing.

It is much pleasanter to have a newspaper say, 'Inspector Blunt's

ingenious and extraordinary theory is as follows,' than to have it say

some harsh thing, or, worse still, some sarcastic one."



"I see the force of what you say.  But I noticed that in one part of your

remarks in the papers this morning you refused to reveal your opinion

upon a certain minor point."



"Yes, we always do that; it has a good effect.  Besides, I had not formed

any opinion on that point, anyway."



I deposited a considerable sum of money with the inspector, to meet

current expenses, and sat down to wait for news.  We were expecting the

telegrams to begin to arrive at any moment now.  Meantime I reread the

newspapers and also our descriptive circular, and observed that our

twenty-five thousand dollars reward seemed to be offered only to

detectives.  I said I thought it ought to be offered to anybody who would

catch the elephant.  The inspector said:



"It is the detectives who will find the elephant; hence the reward will

go to the right place.  If other people found the animal, it would only

be by watching the detectives and taking advantage of clues and

indications stolen from them, and that would entitle the detectives to

the reward, after all.  The proper office of a reward is to stimulate the

men who deliver up their time and their trained sagacities to this sort

of work, and not to confer benefits upon chance citizens who stumble upon

a capture without having earned the benefits by their own merits and

labors."



This was reasonable enough, certainly.  Now the telegraphic machine in

the corner began to click, and the following despatch was the result:



                         FLOWER STATION, N. Y., 7.30 A.M.

     Have got a clue.  Found a succession of deep tracks across a farm

     near here.  Followed them two miles east without result; think

     elephant went west.  Shall now shadow him in that direction.

                         DARLEY, Detective.



"Darley's one of the best men on the force," said the inspector.  "We

shall hear from him again before long."



Telegram No. 2 came:



                         BARKER'S, N. J., 7.40 A.M.

     Just arrived.  Glass factory broken open here during night, and

     eight hundred bottles taken.  Only water in large quantity near here

     is five miles distant.  Shall strike for there.  Elephant will be

     thirsty.  Bottles were empty.

                         DARLEY, Detective.



"That promises well, too," said the inspector.



"I told you the creature's appetites would not be bad clues."



Telegram No. 3:



                         TAYLORVILLE, L. I. 8.15 A.M.

     A haystack near here disappeared during night.  Probably eaten.

     Have got a clue, and am off.

                         HUBBARD, Detective.



"How he does move around!" said the inspector "I knew we had a difficult

job on hand, but we shall catch him yet."



                         FLOWER STATION, N. Y., 9 A.M.

     Shadowed the tracks three miles westward.  Large, deep, and ragged.

     Have just met a farmer who says they are not elephant-tracks.  Says

     they are holes where he dug up saplings for shade-trees when ground

     was frozen last winter.  Give me orders how to proceed.

                         DARLEY, Detective.



"Aha! a confederate of the thieves!  The thing, grows warm," said the

inspector.



He dictated the following telegram to Darley:



     Arrest the man and force him to name his pals.  Continue to follow

     the tracks to the Pacific, if necessary.

                         Chief BLUNT.



Next telegram:



                         CONEY POINT, PA., 8.45 A.M.

     Gas office broken open here during night and three month; unpaid gas

     bills taken.  Have got a clue and am away.

                         MURPHY, Detective.



"Heavens!" said the inspector; "would he eat gas bills?"



"Through ignorance--yes; but they cannot support life.  At least,

unassisted."



Now came this exciting telegram:



                         IRONVILLE, N. Y., 9.30 A.M.

     Just arrived.  This village in consternation.  Elephant passed

     through here at five this morning.  Some say he went east some say

     west, some north, some south--but all say they did not wait to

     notice, particularly.  He killed a horse; have secure a piece of it

     for a clue.  Killed it with his trunk; from style of blow, think he

     struck it left-handed.  From position in which horse lies, think

     elephant traveled northward along line Berkley Railway.  Has four

     and a half hours' start, but I move on his track at once.

                         HAWES, Detective



I uttered exclamations of joy.  The inspector was as self-contained as a

graven image.  He calmly touched his bell.



"Alaric, send Captain Burns here."



Burns appeared.



"How many men are ready for instant orders?"



"Ninety-six, sir."



"Send them north at once.  Let them concentrate along the line of the

Berkley road north of Ironville."



"Yes, sir."



"Let them conduct their movements with the utmost secrecy.  As fast as

others are at liberty, hold them for orders."



"Yes, sir."



"Go!"



"Yes, sir."



Presently came another telegram:



                         SAGE CORNERS, N. Y., 10.30.

     Just arrived.  Elephant passed through here at 8.15.  All escaped

     from the town but a policeman.  Apparently elephant did not strike

     at policeman, but at the lamp-post.  Got both.  I have secured a

     portion of the policeman as clue.

                         STUMM, Detective.



"So the elephant has turned westward," said the inspector.  "However, he

will not escape, for my men are scattered all over that region."



The next telegram said:



                         GLOVER'S, 11.15

Just arrived.  Village deserted, except sick and aged.  Elephant passed

through three-quarters of an hour ago.  The anti-temperance mass-meeting

was in session; he put his trunk in at a window and washed it out with

water from cistern.  Some swallowed it--since dead; several drowned.

Detectives Cross and O'Shaughnessy were passing through town, but going

south--so missed elephant.  Whole region for many miles around in terror

--people flying from their homes.  Wherever they turn they meet elephant,

and many are killed.

                         BRANT, Detective.



I could have shed tears, this havoc so distressed me.  But the inspector

only said:



"You see--we are closing in on him.  He feels our presence; he has turned

eastward again."



Yet further troublous news was in store for us.  The telegraph brought

this:



                         HOGANSPORT, 12.19.

     Just arrived.  Elephant passed through half an hour ago, creating

     wildest fright and excitement.  Elephant raged around streets; two

     plumbers going by, killed one--other escaped.  Regret general.

                         O'FLAHERTY, Detective.



"Now he is right in the midst of my men," said the inspector.  "Nothing

can save him."



A succession of telegrams came from detectives who were scattered through

New Jersey and Pennsylvania, and who were following clues consisting of

ravaged barns, factories, and Sunday-school libraries, with high

hopes-hopes amounting to certainties, indeed.  The inspector said:



"I wish I could communicate with them and order them north, but that is

impossible.  A detective only visits a telegraph office to send his

report; then he is off again, and you don't know where to put your hand

on him."



Now came this despatch:



                         BRIDGEPORT, CT., 12.15.

     Barnum offers rate of $4,000 a year for exclusive privilege of using

     elephant as traveling advertising medium from now till detectives

     find him.  Wants to paste circus-posters on him. Desires immediate

     answer.

                         BOGGS, Detective.



"That is perfectly absurd!" I exclaimed.



"Of course it is," said the inspector.  "Evidently Mr. Barnum, who thinks

he is so sharp, does not know me--but I know him."



Then he dictated this answer to the despatch:



     Mr. Barnum's offer declined.  Make it $7,000 or nothing.

                         Chief BLUNT.



"There.  We shall not have to wait long for an answer.  Mr.  Barnum is

not at home; he is in the telegraph office--it is his way when he has

business on hand.  Inside of three--"



     Done.--P. T. BARNUM.



So interrupted the clicking telegraphic instrument.  Before I could make

a comment upon this extraordinary episode, the following despatch carried

my thoughts into another and very distressing channel:



                         BOLIVIA, N. Y., 12.50.

     Elephant arrived here from the south and passed through toward the

     forest at 11.50, dispersing a funeral on the way, and diminishing

     the mourners by two.  Citizens fired some small cannon-balls into

     him, and they fled.  Detective Burke and I arrived ten minutes

     later, from the north, but mistook some excavations for footprints,

     and so lost a good deal of time; but at last we struck the right

     trail and followed it to the woods.  We then got down on our hands

     and knees and continued to keep a sharp eye on the track, and so

     shadowed it into the brush.  Burke was in advance.  Unfortunately

     the animal had stopped to rest; therefore, Burke having his head

     down, intent upon the track, butted up against the elephant's hind

     legs before he was aware of his vicinity.  Burke instantly arose to

     his feet, seized the tail, and exclaimed joyfully, "I claim the

     re--" but got no further, for a single blow of the huge trunk laid

     the brave fellow's fragments low in death.  I fled rearward, and the

     elephant turned and shadowed me to the edge of the wood, making

     tremendous speed, and I should inevitably have been lost, but that

     the remains of the funeral providentially intervened again and

     diverted his attention.  I have just learned that nothing of that

     funeral is now left; but this is no loss, for there is abundance of

     material for another.  Meantime, the elephant has disappeared again.

                         MULROONEY, Detective.



We heard no news except from the diligent and confident detectives

scattered about New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Virginia--who

were all following fresh and encouraging clues--until shortly after

2 P.M., when this telegram came:



                         BAXTER CENTER, 2.15.

     Elephant been here, plastered over with circus-bills, any broke up a

     revival, striking down and damaging many who were on the point of

     entering upon a better life.  Citizens penned him up and established

     a guard.  When Detective Brown and I arrived, some time after, we

     entered inclosure and proceeded to identify elephant by photograph

     and description.  All masks tallied exactly except one, which we

     could not see--the boil-scar under armpit.  To make sure, Brown

     crept under to look, and was immediately brained--that is, head

     crushed and destroyed, though nothing issued from debris.  All fled

     so did elephant, striking right and left with much effect.  He

     escaped, but left bold blood-track from cannon-wounds.  Rediscovery

     certain.  He broke southward, through a dense forest.

                         BRENT, Detective.



That was the last telegram.  At nightfall a fog shut down which was so

dense that objects but three feet away could not be discerned.  This

lasted all night.  The ferry-boats and even the omnibuses had to stop

running.







III



Next morning the papers were as full of detective theories as before;

they had all our tragic facts in detail also, and a great many more which

they had received from their telegraphic correspondents.  Column after

column was occupied, a third of its way down, with glaring head-lines,

which it made my heart sick to read.  Their general tone was like this:



     THE WHITE ELEPHANT AT LARGE!  HE MOVES UPON HIS FATAL MARCH WHOLE

     VILLAGES DESERTED BY THEIR FRIGHT-STRICKEN OCCUPANTS!  PALE TERROR

     GOES BEFORE HIM, DEATH AND DEVASTATION FOLLOW AFTER!  AFTER THESE,

     THE DETECTIVES!  BARNS DESTROYED, FACTORIES GUTTED, HARVESTS

     DEVOURED, PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGES DISPERSED, ACCOMPANIED BY SCENES OF

     CARNAGE IMPOSSIBLE TO DESCRIBE!  THEORIES OF THIRTY-FOUR OF THE MOST

     DISTINGUISHED DETECTIVES ON THE FORCES!  THEORY OF CHIEF BLUNT!



"There!" said Inspector Blunt, almost betrayed into excitement, "this is

magnificent!  This is the greatest windfall that any detective

organization ever had.  The fame of it will travel to the ends of the

earth, and endure to the end of time, and my name with it."



But there was no joy for me.  I felt as if I had committed all those red

crimes, and that the elephant was only my irresponsible agent.  And how

the list had grown!  In one place he had "interfered with an election and

killed five repeaters."  He had followed this act with the destruction of

two pool fellows, named O'Donohue and McFlannigan, who had "found a

refuge in the home of the oppressed of all lands only the day before, and

were in the act of exercising for the first time the noble right of

American citizens at the polls, when stricken down by the relentless

hand of the Scourge of Siam."  In another, he had "found a crazy

sensation-preacher preparing his next season's heroic attacks on the

dance, the theater, and other things which can't strike back, and had

stepped on him."  And in still another place he had "killed a

lightning-rod agent." And so the list went on, growing redder and redder,

and more and more heartbreaking.  Sixty persons had been killed, and two

hundred and forty wounded.  All the accounts bore just testimony to the

activity and devotion of the detectives, and all closed with the remark

that "three hundred thousand citizen; and four detectives saw the dread

creature, and two of the latter he destroyed."



I dreaded to hear the telegraphic instrument begin to click again.

By and by the messages began to pour in, but I was happily disappointed

in they nature.  It was soon apparent that all trace of the elephant was

lost.  The fog had enabled him to search out a good hiding-place

unobserved.  Telegrams from the most absurdly distant points reported

that a dim vast mass had been glimpsed there through the fog at such and

such an hour, and was "undoubtedly the elephant."  This dim vast mass had

been glimpsed in New Haven, in New Jersey, in Pennsylvania, in interior

New York, in Brooklyn, and even in the city of New York itself!  But in

all cases the dim vast mass had vanished quickly and left no trace.

Every detective of the large force scattered over this huge extent of

country sent his hourly report, and each and every one of them had a

clue, and was shadowing something, and was hot upon the heels of it.



But the day passed without other result.



The next day the same.



The next just the same.



The newspaper reports began to grow monotonous with facts that amounted

to nothing, clues which led to nothing, and theories which had nearly

exhausted the elements which surprise and delight and dazzle.



By advice of the inspector I doubled the reward.



Four more dull days followed.  Then came a bitter blow to the poor,

hard-working detectives--the journalists declined to print their

theories, and coldly said, "Give us a rest."



Two weeks after the elephant's disappearance I raised the reward to

seventy-five thousand dollars by the inspector's advice.  It was a great

sum, but I felt that I would rather sacrifice my whole private fortune

than lose my credit with my government.  Now that the detectives were in

adversity, the newspapers turned upon them, and began to fling the most

stinging sarcasms at them.  This gave the minstrels an idea, and they

dressed themselves as detectives and hunted the elephant on the stage in

the most extravagant way.  The caricaturists made pictures of detectives

scanning the country with spy-glasses, while the elephant, at their

backs, stole apples out of their pockets.  And they made all sorts of

ridiculous pictures of the detective badge--you have seen that badge

printed in gold on the back of detective novels, no doubt it is a

wide-staring eye, with the legend, "WE NEVER SLEEP."  When detectives

called for a drink, the would-be facetious barkeeper resurrected an

obsolete form of expression and said, "Will you have an eye-opener?"

All the air was thick with sarcasms.



But there was one man who moved calm, untouched, unaffected, through it

all.  It was that heart of oak, the chief inspector.  His brave eye never

drooped, his serene confidence never wavered.  He always said:



"Let them rail on; he laughs best who laughs last."



My admiration for the man grew into a species of worship.  I was at his

side always.  His office had become an unpleasant place to me, and now

became daily more and more so.  Yet if he could endure it I meant to do

so also--at least, as long as I could.  So I came regularly, and stayed

--the only outsider who seemed to be capable of it.  Everybody wondered

how I could; and often it seemed to me that I must desert, but at such

times I looked into that calm and apparently unconscious face, and held

my ground.



About three weeks after the elephant's disappearance I was about to say,

one morning, that I should have to strike my colors and retire, when the

great detective arrested the thought by proposing one more superb and

masterly move.



This was to compromise with the robbers.  The fertility of this man's

invention exceeded anything I have ever seen, and I have had a wide

intercourse with the world's finest minds.  He said he was confident he

could compromise for one hundred thousand dollars and recover the

elephant.  I said I believed I could scrape the amount together, but what

would become of the poor detectives who had worked so faithfully?  He

said:



"In compromises they always get half."



This removed my only objection.  So the inspector wrote two notes, in

this form:



     DEAR MADAM,--Your husband can make a large sum of money (and be

     entirely protected from the law) by making an immediate, appointment

     with me.                           Chief BLUNT.



He sent one of these by his confidential messenger to the "reputed wife"

of Brick Duffy, and the other to the reputed wife of Red McFadden.



Within the hour these offensive answers came:



     YE OWLD FOOL: brick Duffys bin ded 2 yere.

                                        BRIDGET MAHONEY.



     CHIEF BAT,--Red McFadden is hung and in heving 18 month.  Any Ass

     but a detective know that.

                                        MARY O'HOOLIGAN.



"I had long suspected these facts," said the inspector; "this testimony

proves the unerring accuracy of my instinct."



The moment one resource failed him he was ready with another.  He

immediately wrote an advertisement for the morning papers, and I kept a

copy of it:



     A.--xWhlv.  242 ht.  Tjnd--fz328wmlg.  Ozpo,--2 m!  2m!.  M! ogw.



He said that if the thief was alive this would bring him to the usual

rendezvous.  He further explained that the usual rendezvous was a glare

where all business affairs between detectives and criminals were

conducted.  This meeting would take place at twelve the next night.



We could do nothing till then, and I lost no time in getting out of the

office, and was grateful indeed for the privilege.



At eleven the next night I brought one hundred thousand dollars in

bank-notes and put them into the chief's hands, and shortly afterward he

took his leave, with the brave old undimmed confidence in his eye.

An almost intolerable hour dragged to a close; then I heard his welcome

tread, and rose gasping and tottered to meet him.  How his fine eyes

flamed with triumph!  He said:



"We've compromised!  The jokers will sing a different tune to-morrow!

Follow me!"



He took a lighted candle and strode down into the vast vaulted basement

where sixty detectives always slept, and where a score were now playing

cards to while the time.  I followed close after him.  He walked swiftly

down to the dim and remote end of the place, and just as I succumbed to

the pangs of suffocation and was swooning away he stumbled and fell over

the outlying members of a mighty object, and I heard him exclaim as he

went down:



"Our noble profession is vindicated.  Here is your elephant!"



I was carried to the office above and restored with carbolic acid.  The

whole detective force swarmed in, and such another season of triumphant

rejoicing ensued as I had never witnessed before.  The reporters were

called, baskets of champagne were opened, toasts were drunk, the

handshakings and congratulations were continuous and enthusiastic.

Naturally the chief was the hero of the hour, and his happiness was so

complete and had been so patiently and worthily and bravely won that it

made me happy to see it, though I stood there a homeless beggar, my

priceless charge dead, and my position in my country's service lost to me

through what would always seem my fatally careless execution of a great

trust.  Many an eloquent eye testified its deep admiration for the chief,

and many a detective's voice murmured, "Look at him--just the king of the

profession; only give him a clue, it's all he wants, and there ain't

anything hid that he can't find."  The dividing of the fifty thousand

dollars made great pleasure; when it was finished the chief made a little

speech while he put his share in his pocket, in which he said, "Enjoy it,

boys, for you've earned it; and, more than that, you've earned for the

detective profession undying fame."



A telegram arrived, which read:



                         MONROE, MICH., 10 P.M.

First time I've struck a telegraph office in over three weeks.  Have

followed those footprints, horseback, through the woods, a thousand miles

to here, and they get stronger and bigger and fresher every day.  Don't

worry-inside of another week I'll have the elephant.  This is dead sure.

                         DARLEY, Detective.



The chief ordered three cheers for "Darley, one of the finest minds on

the force," and then commanded that he be telegraphed to come home and

receive his share of the reward.



So ended that marvelous episode of the stolen elephant.  The newspapers

were pleasant with praises once more, the next day, with one contemptible

exception.  This sheet said, "Great is the detective!  He may be a little

slow in finding a little thing like a mislaid elephant he may hunt him

all day and sleep with his rotting carcass all night for three weeks, but

he will find him at last if he can get the man who mislaid him to show

him the place!"



Poor Hassan was lost to me forever.  The cannonshots had wounded him

fatally, he had crept to that unfriendly place in the fog, and there,

surrounded by his enemies and in constant danger of detection, he had

wasted away with hunger and suffering till death gave him peace.



The compromise cost me one hundred thousand dollars; my detective

expenses were forty-two thousand dollars more; I never applied for a

place again under my government; I am a ruined man and a wanderer on the

earth but my admiration for that man, whom I believe to be the greatest

detective the world has ever produced, remains undimmed to this day, and

will so remain unto the end.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Stolen White Elephant

by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)













                    A TRAMP ABROAD



                     By Mark Twain

                  (Samuel L. Clemens)



                First published in 1880





                      * * * * * *







CHAPTER I

[The Knighted Knave of Bergen]



One day it occurred to me that it had been many years

since the world had been afforded the spectacle of a man

adventurous enough to undertake a journey through Europe

on foot.  After much thought, I decided that I was

a person fitted to furnish to mankind this spectacle.

So I determined to do it.  This was in March, 1878.



I looked about me for the right sort of person to

accompany me in the capacity of agent, and finally

hired a Mr. Harris for this service.



It was also my purpose to study art while in Europe.

Mr. Harris was in sympathy with me in this.  He was as much

of an enthusiast in art as I was, and not less anxious

to learn to paint.  I desired to learn the German language;

so did Harris.



Toward the middle of April we sailed in the HOLSATIA,

Captain Brandt, and had a very peasant trip, indeed.



After a brief rest at Hamburg, we made preparations for

a long pedestrian trip southward in the soft spring weather,

but at the last moment we changed the program,

for private reasons, and took the express-train.



We made a short halt at Frankfort-on-the-Main, and found

it an interesting city.  I would have liked to visit

the birthplace of Gutenburg, but it could not be done,

as no memorandum of the site of the house has been kept.

So we spent an hour in the Goethe mansion instead.

The city permits this house to belong to private parties,

instead of gracing and dignifying herself with the honor

of possessing and protecting it.



Frankfort is one of the sixteen cities which have

the distinction of being the place where the following

incident occurred.  Charlemagne, while chasing the Saxons

(as HE said), or being chased by them (as THEY said),

arrived at the bank of the river at dawn, in a fog.

The enemy were either before him or behind him;

but in any case he wanted to get across, very badly.

He would have given anything for a guide, but none was to

be had.  Presently he saw a deer, followed by her young,

approach the water.  He watched her, judging that she

would seek a ford, and he was right.  She waded over,

and the army followed.  So a great Frankish victory or

defeat was gained or avoided; and in order to commemorate

the episode, Charlemagne commanded a city to be built there,

which he named Frankfort--the ford of the Franks.

None of the other cities where this event happened were

named for it.  This is good evidence that Frankfort was

the first place it occurred at.



Frankfort has another distinction--it is the birthplace

of the German alphabet; or at least of the German word

for alphabet --BUCHSTABEN. They say that the first movable

types were made on birch sticks--BUCHSTABE--hence the name.



I was taught a lesson in political economy in Frankfort.

I had brought from home a box containing a thousand

very cheap cigars.  By way of experiment, I stepped

into a little shop in a queer old back street, took four

gaily decorated boxes of wax matches and three cigars,

and laid down a silver piece worth 48 cents.  The man gave

me 43 cents change.



In Frankfort everybody wears clean clothes, and I think we

noticed that this strange thing was the case in Hamburg, too,

and in the villages along the road.  Even in the narrowest

and poorest and most ancient quarters of Frankfort neat

and clean clothes were the rule.  The little children

of both sexes were nearly always nice enough to take into

a body's lap.  And as for the uniforms of the soldiers,

they were newness and brightness carried to perfection.

One could never detect a smirch or a grain of dust

upon them.  The street-car conductors and drivers wore

pretty uniforms which seemed to be just out of the bandbox,

and their manners were as fine as their clothes.



In one of the shops I had the luck to stumble upon a book

which has charmed me nearly to death.  It is entitled

THE LEGENDS OF THE RHINE FROM BASLE TO ROTTERDAM,

by F. J. Kiefer; translated by L. W. Garnham, B.A.



All tourists MENTION the Rhine legends--in that sort of way

which quietly pretends that the mentioner has been familiar

with them all his life, and that the reader cannot possibly

be ignorant of them--but no tourist ever TELLS them.

So this little book fed me in a very hungry place; and I,

in my turn, intend to feed my reader, with one or two

little lunches from the same larder.  I shall not mar

Garnharn's translation by meddling with its English;

for the most toothsome thing about it is its quaint

fashion of building English sentences on the German plan

--and punctuating them accordingly to no plan at all.



In the chapter devoted to "Legends of Frankfort,"

I find the following:



"THE KNAVE OF BERGEN"



"In Frankfort at the Romer was a great mask-ball, at

the coronation festival, and in the illuminated saloon,

the clanging music invited to dance, and splendidly

appeared the rich toilets and charms of the ladies,

and the festively costumed Princes and Knights.

All seemed pleasure, joy, and roguish gaiety, only one of the

numerous guests had a gloomy exterior; but exactly the black

armor in which he walked about excited general attention,

and his tall figure, as well as the noble propriety of

his movements, attracted especially the regards of the ladies.

Who the Knight was? Nobody could guess, for his Vizier

was well closed, and nothing made him recognizable.

Proud and yet modest he advanced to the Empress; bowed on

one knee before her seat, and begged for the favor of a

waltz with the Queen of the festival.  And she allowed

his request.  With light and graceful steps he danced

through the long saloon, with the sovereign who thought

never to have found a more dexterous and excellent dancer.

But also by the grace of his manner, and fine conversation

he knew to win the Queen, and she graciously accorded him

a second dance for which he begged, a third, and a fourth,

as well as others were not refused him.  How all regarded

the happy dancer, how many envied him the high favor;

how increased curiosity, who the masked knight could be.



"Also the Emperor became more and more excited with curiosity,

and with great suspense one awaited the hour, when according

to mask-law, each masked guest must make himself known.

This moment came, but although all other unmasked;

the secret knight still refused to allow his features

to be seen, till at last the Queen driven by curiosity,

and vexed at the obstinate refusal; commanded him to open

his Vizier.  He opened it, and none of the high ladies

and knights knew him.  But from the crowded spectators,

2 officials advanced, who recognized the black dancer,

and horror and terror spread in the saloon, as they said who

the supposed knight was.  It was the executioner of Bergen.

But glowing with rage, the King commanded to seize the

criminal and lead him to death, who had ventured to dance,

with the queen; so disgraced the Empress, and insulted

the crown.  The culpable threw himself at the Emperor,

and said--



"'Indeed I have heavily sinned against all noble guests

assembled here, but most heavily against you my sovereign

and my queen.  The Queen is insulted by my haughtiness

equal to treason, but no punishment even blood, will not

be able to wash out the disgrace, which you have suffered

by me.  Therefore oh King! allow me to propose a remedy,

to efface the shame, and to render it as if not done.

Draw your sword and knight me, then I will throw down

my gauntlet, to everyone who dares to speak disrespectfully

of my king.'



"The Emperor was surprised at this bold proposal,

however it appeared the wisest to him; 'You are a knave

he replied after a moment's consideration, however your

advice is good, and displays prudence, as your offense

shows adventurous courage.  Well then, and gave him the

knight-stroke so I raise you to nobility, who begged for

grace for your offense now kneels before me, rise as knight;

knavish you have acted, and Knave of Bergen shall you

be called henceforth, and gladly the Black knight rose;

three cheers were given in honor of the Emperor,

and loud cries of joy testified the approbation with

which the Queen danced still once with the Knave of Bergen."







CHAPTER II

Heidelberg

[Landing a Monarch at Heidelberg]



We stopped at a hotel by the railway-station. Next morning,

as we sat in my room waiting for breakfast to come up,

we got a good deal interested in something which was

going on over the way, in front of another hotel.

First, the personage who is called the PORTIER (who is

not the PORTER, but is a sort of first-mate of a hotel)

[1. See Appendix A] appeared at the door in a spick-and-span

new blue cloth uniform, decorated with shining brass buttons,

and with bands of gold lace around his cap and wristbands;

and he wore white gloves, too.  He shed an official glance

upon the situation, and then began to give orders.

Two women-servants came out with pails and brooms

and brushes, and gave the sidewalk a thorough scrubbing;

meanwhile two others scrubbed the four marble steps

which led up to the door; beyond these we could see some

men-servants taking up the carpet of the grand staircase.

This carpet was carried away and the last grain of dust

beaten and banged and swept out of it; then brought back

and put down again.  The brass stair-rods received an

exhaustive polishing and were returned to their places.

Now a troop of servants brought pots and tubs

of blooming plants and formed them into a beautiful

jungle about the door and the base of the staircase.

Other servants adorned all the balconies of the various

stories with flowers and banners; others ascended

to the roof and hoisted a great flag on a staff there.

Now came some more chamber-maids and retouched the sidewalk,

and afterward wiped the marble steps with damp cloths

and finished by dusting them off with feather brushes.

Now a broad black carpet was brought out and laid down the

marble steps and out across the sidewalk to the curbstone.

The PORTIER cast his eye along it, and found it was not

absolutely straight; he commanded it to be straightened;

the servants made the effort--made several efforts,

in fact--but the PORTIER was not satisfied.  He finally

had it taken up, and then he put it down himself and got

it right.



At this stage of the proceedings, a narrow bright

red carpet was unrolled and stretched from the top

of the marble steps to the curbstone, along the center

of the black carpet.  This red path cost the PORTIER

more trouble than even the black one had done.  But he

patiently fixed and refixed it until it was exactly right

and lay precisely in the middle of the black carpet.

In New York these performances would have gathered a mighty

crowd of curious and intensely interested spectators;

but here it only captured an audience of half a dozen

little boys who stood in a row across the pavement,

some with their school-knapsacks on their backs and their

hands in their pockets, others with arms full of bundles,

and all absorbed in the show.  Occasionally one of them

skipped irreverently over the carpet and took up a position

on the other side.  This always visibly annoyed the PORTIER.



Now came a waiting interval.  The landlord, in plain clothes,

and bareheaded, placed himself on the bottom marble step,

abreast the PORTIER, who stood on the other end of the

same steps; six or eight waiters, gloved, bareheaded,

and wearing their whitest linen, their whitest cravats,

and their finest swallow-tails, grouped themselves

about these chiefs, but leaving the carpetway clear.

Nobody moved or spoke any more but only waited.



In a short time the shrill piping of a coming train was heard,

and immediately groups of people began to gather in the street.

Two or three open carriages arrived, and deposited some

maids of honor and some male officials at the hotel.

Presently another open carriage brought the Grand Duke

of Baden, a stately man in uniform, who wore the handsome

brass-mounted, steel-spiked helmet of the army on his head.

Last came the Empress of Germany and the Grand Duchess

of Baden in a closed carriage; these passed through the

low-bowing groups of servants and disappeared in the hotel,

exhibiting to us only the backs of their heads, and then

the show was over.



It appears to be as difficult to land a monarch as it

is to launch a ship.



But as to Heidelberg.  The weather was growing pretty warm,

--very warm, in fact.  So we left the valley and took

quarters at the Schloss Hotel, on the hill, above the Castle.



Heidelberg lies at the mouth of a narrow gorge--a gorge

the shape of a shepherd's crook; if one looks up it he

perceives that it is about straight, for a mile and a half,

then makes a sharp curve to the right and disappears.

This gorge--along whose bottom pours the swift Neckar

--is confined between (or cloven through) a couple of long,

steep ridges, a thousand feet high and densely wooded

clear to their summits, with the exception of one section

which has been shaved and put under cultivation.

These ridges are chopped off at the mouth of the gorge

and form two bold and conspicuous headlands, with Heidelberg

nestling between them; from their bases spreads away

the vast dim expanse of the Rhine valley, and into this

expanse the Neckar goes wandering in shining curves and is

presently lost to view.



Now if one turns and looks up the gorge once more, he will

see the Schloss Hotel on the right perched on a precipice

overlooking the Neckar--a precipice which is so sumptuously

cushioned and draped with foliage that no glimpse of the

rock appears.  The building seems very airily situated.

It has the appearance of being on a shelf half-way up

the wooded mountainside; and as it is remote and isolated,

and very white, it makes a strong mark against the lofty

leafy rampart at its back.



This hotel had a feature which was a decided novelty,

and one which might be adopted with advantage by any house

which is perched in a commanding situation.  This feature

may be described as a series of glass-enclosed parlors

CLINGING TO THE OUTSIDE OF THE HOUSE, one against each

and every bed-chamber and drawing-room. They are like long,

narrow, high-ceiled bird-cages hung against the building.

My room was a corner room, and had two of these things,

a north one and a west one.



From the north cage one looks up the Neckar gorge;

from the west one he looks down it.  This last affords

the most extensive view, and it is one of the loveliest

that can be imagined, too.  Out of a billowy upheaval of

vivid green foliage, a rifle-shot removed, rises the huge

ruin of Heidelberg Castle, [2. See Appendix B] with empty window

arches,

ivy-mailed battlements, moldering towers--the Lear of

inanimate nature--deserted, discrowned, beaten by the storms,

but royal still, and beautiful.  It is a fine sight to see

the evening sunlight suddenly strike the leafy declivity

at the Castle's base and dash up it and drench it as with

a luminous spray, while the adjacent groves are in deep shadow.



Behind the Castle swells a great dome-shaped hill,

forest-clad, and beyond that a nobler and loftier one.

The Castle looks down upon the compact brown-roofed town;

and from the town two picturesque old bridges span

the river.  Now the view broadens; through the gateway

of the sentinel headlands you gaze out over the wide

Rhine plain, which stretches away, softly and richly tinted,

grows gradually and dreamily indistinct, and finally melts

imperceptibly into the remote horizon.



I have never enjoyed a view which had such a serene

and satisfying charm about it as this one gives.



The first night we were there, we went to bed and to

sleep early; but I awoke at the end of two or three hours,

and lay a comfortable while listening to the soothing

patter of the rain against the balcony windows.

I took it to be rain, but it turned out to be only the

murmur of the restless Neckar, tumbling over her dikes

and dams far below, in the gorge.  I got up and went

into the west balcony and saw a wonderful sight.

Away down on the level under the black mass of the Castle,

the town lay, stretched along the river, its intricate

cobweb of streets jeweled with twinkling lights;

there were rows of lights on the bridges; these flung

lances of light upon the water, in the black shadows

of the arches; and away at the extremity of all this

fairy spectacle blinked and glowed a massed multitude

of gas-jets which seemed to cover acres of ground;

it was as if all the diamonds in the world had been spread

out there.  I did not know before, that a half-mile

of sextuple railway-tracks could be made such an adornment.



One thinks Heidelberg by day--with its surroundings

--is the last possibility of the beautiful; but when he

sees Heidelberg by night, a fallen Milky Way, with that

glittering railway constellation pinned to the border,

he requires time to consider upon the verdict.



One never tires of poking about in the dense woods that

clothe all these lofty Neckar hills to their beguiling

and impressive charm in any country; but German legends

and fairy tales have given these an added charm.

They have peopled all that region with gnomes, and dwarfs,

and all sorts of mysterious and uncanny creatures.

At the time I am writing of, I had been reading so much

of this literature that sometimes I was not sure but I

was beginning to believe in the gnomes and fairies

as realities.



One afternoon I got lost in the woods about a mile from

the hotel, and presently fell into a train of dreamy thought

about animals which talk, and kobolds, and enchanted folk,

and the rest of the pleasant legendary stuff; and so,

by stimulating my fancy, I finally got to imagining I

glimpsed small flitting shapes here and there down the

columned aisles of the forest.  It was a place which was

peculiarly meet for the occasion.  It was a pine wood,

with so thick and soft a carpet of brown needles that one's

footfall made no more sound than if he were treading

on wool; the tree-trunks were as round and straight

and smooth as pillars, and stood close together;

they were bare of branches to a point about twenty-five

feet above-ground, and from there upward so thick with

boughs that not a ray of sunlight could pierce through.

The world was bright with sunshine outside, but a deep

and mellow twilight reigned in there, and also a deep

silence so profound that I seemed to hear my own breathings.



When I had stood ten minutes, thinking and imagining,

and getting my spirit in tune with the place, and in the

right mood to enjoy the supernatural, a raven suddenly

uttered a horse croak over my head.  It made me start;

and then I was angry because I started.  I looked up,

and the creature was sitting on a limb right over me,

looking down at me.  I felt something of the same sense

of humiliation and injury which one feels when he finds

that a human stranger has been clandestinely inspecting

him in his privacy and mentally commenting upon him.

I eyed the raven, and the raven eyed me.  Nothing was said

during some seconds.  Then the bird stepped a little way

along his limb to get a better point of observation,

lifted his wings, stuck his head far down below his

shoulders toward me and croaked again--a croak with a

distinctly insulting expression about it.  If he had

spoken in English he could not have said any more plainly

that he did say in raven, "Well, what do YOU want here?"

I felt as foolish as if I had been caught in some mean act

by a responsible being, and reproved for it.  However, I

made no reply; I would not bandy words with a raven.

The adversary waited a while, with his shoulders still lifted,

his head thrust down between them, and his keen bright eye

fixed on me; then he threw out two or three more insults,

which I could not understand, further than that I

knew a portion of them consisted of language not used

in church.



I still made no reply.  Now the adversary raised his head

and called.  There was an answering croak from a little

distance in the wood--evidently a croak of inquiry.

The adversary explained with enthusiasm, and the other raven

dropped everything and came.  The two sat side by side

on the limb and discussed me as freely and offensively

as two great naturalists might discuss a new kind of bug.

The thing became more and more embarrassing.  They called

in another friend.  This was too much.  I saw that they

had the advantage of me, and so I concluded to get out

of the scrape by walking out of it.  They enjoyed my

defeat as much as any low white people could have done.

They craned their necks and laughed at me (for a raven

CAN laugh, just like a man), they squalled insulting remarks

after me as long as they could see me.  They were nothing

but ravens--I knew that--what they thought of me could

be a matter of no consequence--and yet when even a raven

shouts after you, "What a hat!" "Oh, pull down your vest!"

and that sort of thing, it hurts you and humiliates you,

and there is no getting around it with fine reasoning and

pretty arguments.



Animals talk to each other, of course.  There can be no

question about that; but I suppose there are very few

people who can understand them.  I never knew but one man

who could.  I knew he could, however, because he told

me so himself.  He was a middle-aged, simple-hearted

miner who had lived in a lonely corner of California,

among the woods and mountains, a good many years,

and had studied the ways of his only neighbors, the beasts

and the birds, until he believed he could accurately

translate any remark which they made.  This was Jim Baker.

According to Jim Baker, some animals have only a

limited education, and some use only simple words,

and scarcely ever a comparison or a flowery figure;

whereas, certain other animals have a large vocabulary,

a fine command of language and a ready and fluent delivery;

consequently these latter talk a great deal; they like it;

they are so conscious of their talent, and they enjoy

"showing off." Baker said, that after long and careful

observation, he had come to the conclusion that the bluejays

were the best talkers he had found among birds and beasts.  Said

he:



"There's more TO a bluejay than any other creature.

He has got more moods, and more different kinds

of feelings than other creatures; and, mind you,

whatever a bluejay feels, he can put into language.

And no mere commonplace language, either, but rattling,

out-and-out book-talk--and bristling with metaphor,

too--just bristling! And as for command of language--why

YOU never see a bluejay get stuck for a word.  No man

ever did.  They just boil out of him! And another thing:

I've noticed a good deal, and there's no bird, or cow,

or anything that uses as good grammar as a bluejay.

You may say a cat uses good grammar.  Well, a cat

does--but you let a cat get excited once; you let a cat

get to pulling fur with another cat on a shed, nights,

and you'll hear grammar that will give you the lockjaw.

Ignorant people think it's the NOISE which fighting

cats make that is so aggravating, but it ain't so;

it's the sickening grammar they use.  Now I've never heard

a jay use bad grammar but very seldom; and when they do,

they are as ashamed as a human; they shut right down

and leave.



"You may call a jay a bird.  Well, so he is, in a measure

--but he's got feathers on him, and don't belong to no church,

perhaps; but otherwise he is just as much human as you be.

And I'll tell you for why.  A jay's gifts, and instincts,

and feelings, and interests, cover the whole ground.

A jay hasn't got any more principle than a Congressman.

A jay will lie, a jay will steal, a jay will deceive,

a jay will betray; and four times out of five, a jay

will go back on his solemnest promise.  The sacredness

of an obligation is such a thing which you can't cram

into no bluejay's head.  Now, on top of all this,

there's another thing; a jay can out-swear any gentleman

in the mines.  You think a cat can swear.  Well, a cat can;

but you give a bluejay a subject that calls for his

reserve-powers, and where is your cat? Don't talk to ME--I

know too much about this thing; in the one little particular

of scolding--just good, clean, out-and-out scolding

--a bluejay can lay over anything, human or divine.

Yes, sir, a jay is everything that a man is.  A jay can cry,

a jay can laugh, a jay can feel shame, a jay can reason

and plan and discuss, a jay likes gossip and scandal,

a jay has got a sense of humor, a jay knows when he is

an ass just as well as you do--maybe better.  If a jay

ain't human, he better take in his sign, that's all.

Now I'm going to tell you a perfectly true fact about

some bluejays."







CHAPTER III

Baker's Bluejay Yarn

[What Stumped the Blue Jays]



"When I first begun to understand jay language correctly,

there was a little incident happened here.  Seven years ago,

the last man in this region but me moved away.  There stands

his house--been empty ever since; a log house, with a plank

roof--just one big room, and no more; no ceiling--nothing

between the rafters and the floor.  Well, one Sunday

morning I was sitting out here in front of my cabin,

with my cat, taking the sun, and looking at the blue hills,

and listening to the leaves rustling so lonely in the trees,

and thinking of the home away yonder in the states,

that I hadn't heard from in thirteen years, when a bluejay

lit on that house, with an acorn in his mouth, and says,

'Hello, I reckon I've struck something.' When he spoke,

the acorn dropped out of his mouth and rolled down the roof,

of course, but he didn't care; his mind was all on the

thing he had struck.  It was a knot-hole in the roof.

He cocked his head to one side, shut one eye and put the

other one to the hole, like a possum looking down a jug;

then he glanced up with his bright eyes, gave a wink

or two with his wings--which signifies gratification,

you understand--and says, 'It looks like a hole,

it's located like a hole--blamed if I don't believe it IS

a hole!'



"Then he cocked his head down and took another look;

he glances up perfectly joyful, this time; winks his wings

and his tail both, and says, 'Oh, no, this ain't no fat thing,

I reckon! If I ain't in luck! --Why it's a perfectly

elegant hole!' So he flew down and got that acorn,

and fetched it up and dropped it in, and was just tilting

his head back, with the heavenliest smile on his face,

when all of a sudden he was paralyzed into a listening

attitude and that smile faded gradually out of his

countenance like breath off'n a razor, and the queerest

look of surprise took its place.  Then he says, 'Why, I

didn't hear it fall!' He cocked his eye at the hole again,

and took a long look; raised up and shook his head;

stepped around to the other side of the hole and took

another look from that side; shook his head again.

He studied a while, then he just went into the Details

--walked round and round the hole and spied into it from every

point of the compass.  No use.  Now he took a thinking

attitude on the comb of the roof and scratched the back

of his head with his right foot a minute, and finally says,

'Well, it's too many for ME, that's certain; must be

a mighty long hole; however, I ain't got no time to fool

around here, I got to "tend to business"; I reckon it's

all right--chance it, anyway.'



"So he flew off and fetched another acorn and dropped

it in, and tried to flirt his eye to the hole quick

enough to see what become of it, but he was too late.

He held his eye there as much as a minute; then he raised

up and sighed, and says, 'Confound it, I don't seem

to understand this thing, no way; however, I'll tackle

her again.' He fetched another acorn, and done his level

best to see what become of it, but he couldn't. He says,

'Well, I never struck no such a hole as this before;

I'm of the opinion it's a totally new kind of a hole.'

Then he begun to get mad.  He held in for a spell,

walking up and down the comb of the roof and shaking

his head and muttering to himself; but his feelings got

the upper hand of him, presently, and he broke loose

and cussed himself black in the face.  I never see a bird

take on so about a little thing.  When he got through he

walks to the hole and looks in again for half a minute;

then he says, 'Well, you're a long hole, and a deep hole,

and a mighty singular hole altogether--but I've started

in to fill you, and I'm damned if I DON'T fill you, if it

takes a hundred years!'



"And with that, away he went.  You never see a bird work

so since you was born.  He laid into his work like a nigger,

and the way he hove acorns into that hole for about

two hours and a half was one of the most exciting and

astonishing spectacles I ever struck.  He never stopped

to take a look anymore--he just hove 'em in and went

for more.  Well, at last he could hardly flop his wings,

he was so tuckered out.  He comes a-dropping down, once more,

sweating like an ice-pitcher, dropped his acorn in and says,

'NOW I guess I've got the bulge on you by this time!'

So he bent down for a look.  If you'll believe me,

when his head come up again he was just pale with rage.

He says, 'I've shoveled acorns enough in there to keep

the family thirty years, and if I can see a sign of one

of 'em I wish I may land in a museum with a belly full

of sawdust in two minutes!'



"He just had strength enough to crawl up on to the

comb and lean his back agin the chimbly, and then he

collected his impressions and begun to free his mind.

I see in a second that what I had mistook for profanity

in the mines was only just the rudiments, as you may say.



"Another jay was going by, and heard him doing his devotions,

and stops to inquire what was up.  The sufferer told him

the whole circumstance, and says, 'Now yonder's the hole,

and if you don't believe me, go and look for yourself.'

So this fellow went and looked, and comes back and says,

'How many did you say you put in there?' 'Not any less

than two tons,' says the sufferer.  The other jay went

and looked again.  He couldn't seem to make it out, so he

raised a yell, and three more jays come.  They all examined

the hole, they all made the sufferer tell it over again,

then they all discussed it, and got off as many leather-headed

opinions about it as an average crowd of humans could

have done.



"They called in more jays; then more and more, till pretty

soon this whole region 'peared to have a blue flush about it.

There must have been five thousand of them; and such

another jawing and disputing and ripping and cussing,

you never heard.  Every jay in the whole lot put his

eye to the hole and delivered a more chuckle-headed

opinion about the mystery than the jay that went there

before him.  They examined the house all over, too.

The door was standing half open, and at last one old jay

happened to go and light on it and look in.  Of course,

that knocked the mystery galley-west in a second.

There lay the acorns, scattered all over the floor..

He flopped his wings and raised a whoop.  'Come here!'

he says, 'Come here, everybody; hang'd if this fool hasn't

been trying to fill up a house with acorns!' They all came

a-swooping down like a blue cloud, and as each fellow

lit on the door and took a glance, the whole absurdity

of the contract that that first jay had tackled hit him

home and he fell over backward suffocating with laughter,

and the next jay took his place and done the same.



"Well, sir, they roosted around here on the housetop

and the trees for an hour, and guffawed over that thing

like human beings.  It ain't any use to tell me a bluejay

hasn't got a sense of humor, because I know better.

And memory, too.  They brought jays here from all over

the United States to look down that hole, every summer

for three years.  Other birds, too.  And they could all

see the point except an owl that come from Nova Scotia

to visit the Yo Semite, and he took this thing in on

his way back.  He said he couldn't see anything funny

in it.  But then he was a good deal disappointed about

Yo Semite, too."







CHAPTER IV

Student Life

[The Laborious Beer King]



The summer semester was in full tide; consequently the

most frequent figure in and about Heidelberg was

the student.  Most of the students were Germans,

of course, but the representatives of foreign lands

were very numerous.  They hailed from every corner

of the globe--for instruction is cheap in Heidelberg,

and so is living, too.  The Anglo-American Club,

composed of British and American students, had twenty-five

members, and there was still much material left to draw from.



Nine-tenths of the Heidelberg students wore no badge

or uniform; the other tenth wore caps of various colors,

and belonged to social organizations called "corps." There

were five corps, each with a color of its own; there were

white caps, blue caps, and red, yellow, and green ones.

The famous duel-fighting is confined to the "corps" boys.

The "KNEIP" seems to be a specialty of theirs, too.

Kneips are held, now and then, to celebrate great occasions,

like the election of a beer king, for instance.

The solemnity is simple; the five corps assemble at night,

and at a signal they all fall loading themselves with beer,

out of pint-mugs, as fast as possible, and each man keeps

his own count--usually by laying aside a lucifer match

for each mud he empties.  The election is soon decided.

When the candidates can hold no more, a count is instituted

and the one who has drank the greatest number of pints is

proclaimed king.  I was told that the last beer king elected

by the corps--or by his own capabilities--emptied his mug

seventy-five times.  No stomach could hold all that quantity

at one time, of course--but there are ways of frequently

creating a vacuum, which those who have been much at sea

will understand.



One sees so many students abroad at all hours, that he

presently begins to wonder if they ever have any

working-hours. Some of them have, some of them haven't.

Each can choose for himself whether he will work or play;

for German university life is a very free life;

it seems to have no restraints.  The student does not live

in the college buildings, but hires his own lodgings,

in any locality he prefers, and he takes his meals when

and where he pleases.  He goes to bed when it suits him,

and does not get up at all unless he wants to.

He is not entered at the university for any particular

length of time; so he is likely to change about.

He passes no examinations upon entering college.

He merely pays a trifling fee of five or ten dollars,

receives a card entitling him to the privileges of

the university, and that is the end of it.  He is now ready

for business--or play, as he shall prefer.  If he elects

to work, he finds a large list of lectures to choose from.

He selects the subjects which he will study, and enters

his name for these studies; but he can skip attendance.



The result of this system is, that lecture-courses upon

specialties of an unusual nature are often delivered

to very slim audiences, while those upon more practical

and every-day matters of education are delivered to very

large ones.  I heard of one case where, day after day,

the lecturer's audience consisted of three students--and always

the same three.  But one day two of them remained away.

The lecturer began as usual--



"Gentlemen," --then, without a smile, he corrected himself,

saying--



"Sir," --and went on with his discourse.



It is said that the vast majority of the Heidelberg students

are hard workers, and make the most of their opportunities;

that they have no surplus means to spend in dissipation,

and no time to spare for frolicking.  One lecture follows

right on the heels of another, with very little time

for the student to get out of one hall and into the next;

but the industrious ones manage it by going on a trot.

The professors assist them in the saving of their time

by being promptly in their little boxed-up pulpits when the

hours strike, and as promptly out again when the hour finishes.

I entered an empty lecture-room one day just before the

clock struck.  The place had simple, unpainted pine desks

and benches for about two hundred persons.



About a minute before the clock struck, a hundred

and fifty students swarmed in, rushed to their seats,

immediately spread open their notebooks and dipped their

pens in ink.  When the clock began to strike, a burly

professor entered, was received with a round of applause,

moved swiftly down the center aisle, said "Gentlemen,"

and began to talk as he climbed his pulpit steps; and by

the time he had arrived in his box and faced his audience,

his lecture was well under way and all the pens were going.

He had no notes, he talked with prodigious rapidity and

energy for an hour--then the students began to remind

him in certain well-understood ways that his time was up;

he seized his hat, still talking, proceeded swiftly down

his pulpit steps, got out the last word of his discourse

as he struck the floor; everybody rose respectfully,

and he swept rapidly down the aisle and disappeared.

An instant rush for some other lecture-room followed,

and in a minute I was alone with the empty benches

once more.



Yes, without doubt, idle students are not the rule.

Out of eight hundred in the town, I knew the faces of only

about fifty; but these I saw everywhere, and daily.

They walked about the streets and the wooded hills,

they drove in cabs, they boated on the river, they sipped

beer and coffee, afternoons, in the Schloss gardens.

A good many of them wore colored caps of the corps.

They were finely and fashionably dressed, their manners

were quite superb, and they led an easy, careless,

comfortable life.  If a dozen of them sat together and a lady

or a gentleman passed whom one of them knew and saluted,

they all rose to their feet and took off their caps.

The members of a corps always received a fellow-member

in this way, too; but they paid no attention to members

of other corps; they did not seem to see them.  This was not

a discourtesy; it was only a part of the elaborate and rigid

corps etiquette.



There seems to be no chilly distance existing between the

German students and the professor; but, on the contrary,

a companionable intercourse, the opposite of chilliness

and reserve.  When the professor enters a beer-hall

in the evening where students are gathered together,

these rise up and take off their caps, and invite the old

gentleman to sit with them and partake.  He accepts,

and the pleasant talk and the beer flow for an hour or two,

and by and by the professor, properly charged and comfortable,

gives a cordial good night, while the students stand

bowing and uncovered; and then he moves on his happy

way homeward with all his vast cargo of learning afloat

in his hold.  Nobody finds fault or feels outraged;

no harm has been done.



It seemed to be a part of corps etiquette to keep a dog

or so, too.  I mean a corps dog--the common property of

the organization, like the corps steward or head servant;

then there are other dogs, owned by individuals.



On a summer afternoon in the Castle gardens, I have

seen six students march solemnly into the grounds,

in single file, each carrying a bright Chinese parasol

and leading a prodigious dog by a string.  It was a very

imposing spectacle.  Sometimes there would be as many

dogs around the pavilion as students; and of all breeds

and of all degrees of beauty and ugliness.  These dogs

had a rather dry time of it; for they were tied to the

benches and had no amusement for an hour or two at a time

except what they could get out of pawing at the gnats,

or trying to sleep and not succeeding.  However, they got

a lump of sugar occasionally--they were fond of that.



It seemed right and proper that students should indulge in dogs;

but everybody else had them, too--old men and young ones,

old women and nice young ladies.  If there is one spectacle

that is unpleasanter than another, it is that of an

elegantly dressed young lady towing a dog by a string.

It is said to be the sign and symbol of blighted love.

It seems to me that some other way of advertising it might

be devised, which would be just as conspicuous and yet

not so trying to the proprieties.



It would be a mistake to suppose that the easy-going

pleasure-seeking student carries an empty head.

Just the contrary.  He has spent nine years in the gymnasium,

under a system which allowed him no freedom, but vigorously

compelled him to work like a slave.  Consequently, he has

left the gymnasium with an education which is so extensive

and complete, that the most a university can do for it

is to perfect some of its profounder specialties.

It is said that when a pupil leaves the gymnasium, he not

only has a comprehensive education, but he KNOWS what he

knows--it is not befogged with uncertainty, it is burnt

into him so that it will stay.  For instance, he does not

merely read and write Greek, but speaks it; the same with

the Latin.  Foreign youth steer clear of the gymnasium;

its rules are too severe.  They go to the university

to put a mansard roof on their whole general education;

but the German student already has his mansard roof, so he

goes there to add a steeple in the nature of some specialty,

such as a particular branch of law, or diseases of the eye,

or special study of the ancient Gothic tongues.

So this German attends only the lectures which belong

to the chosen branch, and drinks his beer and tows his dog

around and has a general good time the rest of the day.

He has been in rigid bondage so long that the large liberty

of the university life is just what he needs and likes

and thoroughly appreciates; and as it cannot last forever,

he makes the most of it while it does last, and so lays

up a good rest against the day that must see him put on

the chains once more and enter the slavery of official

or professional life.







CHAPTER V

At the Students' Dueling-Ground

[Dueling by Wholesale]



One day in the interest of science my agent obtained

permission to bring me to the students' dueling-place. We

crossed the river and drove up the bank a few hundred yards,

then turned to the left, entered a narrow alley, followed it

a hundred yards and arrived at a two-story public house;

we were acquainted with its outside aspect, for it was

visible from the hotel.  We went upstairs and passed into

a large whitewashed apartment which was perhaps fifty feet

long by thirty feet wide and twenty or twenty-five high.

It was a well-lighted place.  There was no carpet.

Across one end and down both sides of the room extended a row

of tables, and at these tables some fifty or seventy-five

students [1. See Appendix C] were sitting.



Some of them were sipping wine, others were playing cards,

others chess, other groups were chatting together,

and many were smoking cigarettes while they waited for

the coming duels.  Nearly all of them wore colored caps;

there were white caps, green caps, blue caps, red caps,

and bright-yellow ones; so, all the five corps were

present in strong force.  In the windows at the vacant

end of the room stood six or eight, narrow-bladed swords

with large protecting guards for the hand, and outside

was a man at work sharpening others on a grindstone.

He understood his business; for when a sword left his hand

one could shave himself with it.



It was observable that the young gentlemen neither bowed

to nor spoke with students whose caps differed in color

from their own.  This did not mean hostility, but only an

armed neutrality.  It was considered that a person could

strike harder in the duel, and with a more earnest interest,

if he had never been in a condition of comradeship with

his antagonist; therefore, comradeship between the corps

was not permitted.  At intervals the presidents of the five

corps have a cold official intercourse with each other,

but nothing further.  For example, when the regular

dueling-day of one of the corps approaches, its president

calls for volunteers from among the membership to

offer battle; three or more respond--but there must not

be less than three; the president lays their names before

the other presidents, with the request that they furnish

antagonists for these challengers from among their corps.

This is promptly done.  It chanced that the present

occasion was the battle-day of the Red Cap Corps.

They were the challengers, and certain caps of other colors

had volunteered to meet them.  The students fight duels

in the room which I have described, TWO DAYS IN EVERY WEEK

DURING SEVEN AND A HALF OR EIGHT MONTHS IN EVERY YEAR.

This custom had continued in Germany two hundred and fifty years.





To return to my narrative.  A student in a white cap

met us and introduced us to six or eight friends of his

who also wore white caps, and while we stood conversing,

two strange-looking figures were led in from another room.

They were students panoplied for the duel.  They were bareheaded;

their eyes were protected by iron goggles which projected

an inch or more, the leather straps of which bound

their ears flat against their heads were wound around

and around with thick wrappings which a sword could not

cut through; from chin to ankle they were padded thoroughly

against injury; their arms were bandaged and rebandaged,

layer upon layer, until they looked like solid black logs.

These weird apparitions had been handsome youths,

clad in fashionable attire, fifteen minutes before,

but now they did not resemble any beings one ever sees

unless in nightmares.  They strode along, with their arms

projecting straight out from their bodies; they did

not hold them out themselves, but fellow-students walked

beside them and gave the needed support.



There was a rush for the vacant end of the room, now,

and we followed and got good places.  The combatants were

placed face to face, each with several members of his own

corps about him to assist; two seconds, well padded,

and with swords in their hands, took their stations;

a student belonging to neither of the opposing corps

placed himself in a good position to umpire the combat;

another student stood by with a watch and a memorandum-book

to keep record of the time and the number and nature of

the wounds; a gray-haired surgeon was present with his lint,

his bandages, and his instruments.  After a moment's pause

the duelists saluted the umpire respectfully, then one

after another the several officials stepped forward,

gracefully removed their caps and saluted him also,

and returned to their places.  Everything was ready now;

students stood crowded together in the foreground,

and others stood behind them on chairs and tables.

Every face was turned toward the center of attraction.



The combatants were watching each other with alert eyes;

a perfect stillness, a breathless interest reigned.

I felt that I was going to see some wary work.  But not so.

The instant the word was given, the two apparitions

sprang forward and began to rain blows down upon each

other with such lightning rapidity that I could not quite

tell whether I saw the swords or only flashes they made

in the air; the rattling din of these blows as they struck

steel or paddings was something wonderfully stirring,

and they were struck with such terrific force that I could

not understand why the opposing sword was not beaten

down under the assault.  Presently, in the midst of the

sword-flashes, I saw a handful of hair skip into the air

as if it had lain loose on the victim's head and a breath

of wind had puffed it suddenly away.



The seconds cried "Halt!" and knocked up the combatants'

swords with their own.  The duelists sat down; a student

official stepped forward, examined the wounded head

and touched the place with a sponge once or twice;

the surgeon came and turned back the hair from the wound

--and revealed a crimson gash two or three inches long,

and proceeded to bind an oval piece of leather and a bunch

of lint over it; the tally-keeper stepped up and tallied

one for the opposition in his book.



Then the duelists took position again; a small stream of

blood was flowing down the side of the injured man's head,

and over his shoulder and down his body to the floor,

but he did not seem to mind this.  The word was given,

and they plunged at each other as fiercely as before;

once more the blows rained and rattled and flashed;

every few moments the quick-eyed seconds would notice

that a sword was bent--then they called "Halt!" struck up

the contending weapons, and an assisting student straightened

the bent one.



The wonderful turmoil went on--presently a bright spark

sprung from a blade, and that blade broken in several pieces,

sent one of its fragments flying to the ceiling.

A new sword was provided and the fight proceeded.

The exercise was tremendous, of course, and in time

the fighters began to show great fatigue.  They were

allowed to rest a moment, every little while; they got

other rests by wounding each other, for then they could

sit down while the doctor applied the lint and bandages.

The laws is that the battle must continue fifteen minutes

if the men can hold out; and as the pauses do not count,

this duel was protracted to twenty or thirty minutes,

I judged.  At last it was decided that the men were too much

wearied to do battle longer.  They were led away drenched

with crimson from head to foot.  That was a good fight,

but it could not count, partly because it did not last

the lawful fifteen minutes (of actual fighting), and

partly because neither man was disabled by his wound.

It was a drawn battle, and corps law requires that drawn

battles shall be refought as soon as the adversaries are

well of their hurts.



During the conflict, I had talked a little, now and then,

with a young gentleman of the White Cap Corps, and he

had mentioned that he was to fight next--and had also

pointed out his challenger, a young gentleman who was

leaning against the opposite wall smoking a cigarette

and restfully observing the duel then in progress.



My acquaintanceship with a party to the coming contest

had the effect of giving me a kind of personal interest

in it; I naturally wished he might win, and it was

the reverse of pleasant to learn that he probably

would not, because, although he was a notable swordsman,

the challenger was held to be his superior.



The duel presently began and in the same furious way

which had marked the previous one.  I stood close by,

but could not tell which blows told and which did not,

they fell and vanished so like flashes of light.  They all

seemed to tell; the swords always bent over the opponents'

heads, from the forehead back over the crown, and seemed

to touch, all the way; but it was not so--a protecting

blade, invisible to me, was always interposed between.

At the end of ten seconds each man had struck twelve

or fifteen blows, and warded off twelve or fifteen,

and no harm done; then a sword became disabled, and a short

rest followed whilst a new one was brought.  Early in the

next round the White Corps student got an ugly wound on

the side of his head and gave his opponent one like it.

In the third round the latter received another bad wound

in the head, and the former had his under-lip divided.

After that, the White Corps student gave many severe wounds,

but got none of the consequence in return.  At the end

of five minutes from the beginning of the duel the surgeon

stopped it; the challenging party had suffered such

injuries that any addition to them might be dangerous.

These injuries were a fearful spectacle, but are better

left undescribed.  So, against expectation, my acquaintance

was the victor.







CHAPTER VI

[A Sport that Sometimes Kills]



The third duel was brief and bloody.  The surgeon stopped

it when he saw that one of the men had received such bad

wounds that he could not fight longer without endangering

his life.



The fourth duel was a tremendous encounter; but at the end

of five or six minutes the surgeon interfered once more:

another man so severely hurt as to render it unsafe to add

to his harms.  I watched this engagement as I watched

the others--with rapt interest and strong excitement,

and with a shrink and a shudder for every blow that laid

open a cheek or a forehead; and a conscious paling of my

face when I occasionally saw a wound of a yet more shocking

nature inflicted.  My eyes were upon the loser of this

duel when he got his last and vanquishing wound--it

was in his face and it carried away his--but no matter,

I must not enter into details.  I had but a glance, and then

turned quickly, but I would not have been looking at all if I

had known what was coming.  No, that is probably not true;

one thinks he would not look if he knew what was coming,

but the interest and the excitement are so powerful that

they would doubtless conquer all other feelings; and so,

under the fierce exhilaration of the clashing steel,

he would yield and look after all.  Sometimes spectators

of these duels faint--and it does seem a very reasonable

thing to do, too.



Both parties to this fourth duel were badly hurt so much

that the surgeon was at work upon them nearly or quite an

hour--a fact which is suggestive.  But this waiting interval

was not wasted in idleness by the assembled students.

It was past noon, therefore they ordered their landlord,

downstairs, to send up hot beefsteaks, chickens, and such things,

and these they ate, sitting comfortable at the several tables,

whilst they chatted, disputed and laughed.  The door to

the surgeon's room stood open, meantime, but the cutting,

sewing, splicing, and bandaging going on in there in

plain view did not seem to disturb anyone's appetite.

I went in and saw the surgeon labor awhile, but could

not enjoy; it was much less trying to see the wounds

given and received than to see them mended; the stir

and turmoil, and the music of the steel, were wanting

here--one's nerves were wrung by this grisly spectacle,

whilst the duel's compensating pleasurable thrill was lacking.



Finally the doctor finished, and the men who were to fight

the closing battle of the day came forth.  A good many

dinners were not completed, yet, but no matter, they could

be eaten cold, after the battle; therefore everybody

crowded forth to see.  This was not a love duel, but a

"satisfaction" affair.  These two students had quarreled,

and were here to settle it.  They did not belong to any of

the corps, but they were furnished with weapons and armor,

and permitted to fight here by the five corps as a courtesy.

Evidently these two young men were unfamiliar with the

dueling ceremonies, though they were not unfamiliar with

the sword.  When they were placed in position they thought

it was time to begin--and then did begin, too, and with

a most impetuous energy, without waiting for anybody

to give the word.  This vastly amused the spectators,

and even broke down their studied and courtly gravity

and surprised them into laughter.  Of course the seconds

struck up the swords and started the duel over again.

At the word, the deluge of blows began, but before long

the surgeon once more interfered--for the only reason

which ever permits him to interfere--and the day's

war was over.  It was now two in the afternoon, and I

had been present since half past nine in the morning.

The field of battle was indeed a red one by this time;

but some sawdust soon righted that.  There had been one

duel before I arrived.  In it one of the men received

many injuries, while the other one escaped without

a scratch.



I had seen the heads and faces of ten youths gashed

in every direction by the keen two-edged blades, and yet

had not seen a victim wince, nor heard a moan, or detected

any fleeting expression which confessed the sharp pain

the hurts were inflicting.  This was good fortitude,

indeed.  Such endurance is to be expected in savages

and prize-fighters, for they are born and educated to it;

but to find it in such perfection in these gently bred

and kindly natured young fellows is matter for surprise.

It was not merely under the excitement of the sword-play

that this fortitude was shown; it was shown in the surgeon's

room where an uninspiring quiet reigned, and where there

was no audience.  The doctor's manipulations brought

out neither grimaces nor moans.  And in the fights

it was observable that these lads hacked and slashed

with the same tremendous spirit, after they were covered

with streaming wounds, which they had shown in the beginning.



The world in general looks upon the college duels as very

farcical affairs: true, but considering that the college

duel is fought by boys; that the swords are real swords;

and that the head and face are exposed, it seems to me

that it is a farce which had quite a grave side to it.

People laugh at it mainly because they think the student

is so covered up with armor that he cannot be hurt.

But it is not so; his eyes are ears are protected,

but the rest of his face and head are bare.  He can not only

be badly wounded, but his life is in danger; and he would

sometimes lose it but for the interference of the surgeon.

It is not intended that his life shall be endangered.

Fatal accidents are possible, however.  For instance,

the student's sword may break, and the end of it fly

up behind his antagonist's ear and cut an artery which

could not be reached if the sword remained whole.

This has happened, sometimes, and death has resulted

on the spot.  Formerly the student's armpits were not

protected--and at that time the swords were pointed,

whereas they are blunt, now; so an artery in the armpit

was sometimes cut, and death followed.  Then in the days

of sharp-pointed swords, a spectator was an occasional

victim--the end of a broken sword flew five or ten

feet and buried itself in his neck or his heart,

and death ensued instantly.  The student duels in Germany

occasion two or three deaths every year, now, but this

arises only from the carelessness of the wounded men;

they eat or drink imprudently, or commit excesses in the

way of overexertion; inflammation sets in and gets such

a headway that it cannot be arrested.  Indeed, there is

blood and pain and danger enough about the college duel

to entitle it to a considerable degree of respect.



All the customs, all the laws, all the details,

pertaining to the student duel are quaint and naive.

The grave, precise, and courtly ceremony with which the

thing is conducted, invests it with a sort of antique charm.



This dignity and these knightly graces suggest the tournament,

not the prize-fight. The laws are as curious as they

are strict.  For instance, the duelist may step forward

from the line he is placed upon, if he chooses, but never

back of it.  If he steps back of it, or even leans back,

it is considered that he did it to avoid a blow or contrive

an advantage; so he is dismissed from his corps in disgrace.

It would seem natural to step from under a descending

sword unconsciously, and against one's will and intent--yet

this unconsciousness is not allowed.  Again: if under the

sudden anguish of a wound the receiver of it makes a grimace,

he falls some degrees in the estimation of his fellows;

his corps are ashamed of him: they call him "hare foot,"

which is the German equivalent for chicken-hearted.







CHAPTER VII

[How Bismark Fought]



In addition to the corps laws, there are some corps

usages which have the force of laws.



Perhaps the president of a corps notices that one of the

membership who is no longer an exempt--that is a freshman

--has remained a sophomore some little time without volunteering

to fight; some day, the president, instead of calling

for volunteers, will APPOINT this sophomore to measure

swords with a student of another corps; he is free

to decline--everybody says so--there is no compulsion.

This is all true--but I have not heard of any student

who DID decline; to decline and still remain in the corps

would make him unpleasantly conspicuous, and properly so,

since he knew, when he joined, that his main business,

as a member, would be to fight.  No, there is no law

against declining--except the law of custom, which is

confessedly stronger than written law, everywhere.



The ten men whose duels I had witnessed did not go away

when their hurts were dressed, as I had supposed they would,

but came back, one after another, as soon as they were free

of the surgeon, and mingled with the assemblage in the

dueling-room. The white-cap student who won the second

fight witnessed the remaining three, and talked with us

during the intermissions.  He could not talk very well,

because his opponent's sword had cut his under-lip in two,

and then the surgeon had sewed it together and overlaid it

with a profusion of white plaster patches; neither could

he eat easily, still he contrived to accomplish a slow

and troublesome luncheon while the last duel was preparing.

The man who was the worst hurt of all played chess

while waiting to see this engagement.  A good part of

his face was covered with patches and bandages, and all

the rest of his head was covered and concealed by them.

It is said that the student likes to appear on the street

and in other public places in this kind of array,

and that this predilection often keeps him out when

exposure to rain or sun is a positive danger for him.

Newly bandaged students are a very common spectacle

in the public gardens of Heidelberg.  It is also said

that the student is glad to get wounds in the face,

because the scars they leave will show so well there;

and it is also said that these face wounds are so prized

that youths have even been known to pull them apart

from time to time and put red wine in them to make

them heal badly and leave as ugly a scar as possible.

It does not look reasonable, but it is roundly asserted

and maintained, nevertheless; I am sure of one thing--scars

are plenty enough in Germany, among the young men;

and very grim ones they are, too.  They crisscross the face

in angry red welts, and are permanent and ineffaceable.

Some of these scars are of a very strange and dreadful aspect;

and the effect is striking when several such accent

the milder ones, which form a city map on a man's face;

they suggest the "burned district" then.  We had often

noticed that many of the students wore a colored silk

band or ribbon diagonally across their breasts.

It transpired that this signifies that the wearer has

fought three duels in which a decision was reached--duels

in which he either whipped or was whipped--for drawn

battles do not count.  [1] After a student has received

his ribbon, he is "free"; he can cease from fighting,

without reproach--except some one insult him; his president

cannot appoint him to fight; he can volunteer if he

wants to, or remain quiescent if he prefers to do so.

Statistics show that he does NOT prefer to remain quiescent.

They show that the duel has a singular fascination about

it somewhere, for these free men, so far from resting upon

the privilege of the badge, are always volunteering.

A corps student told me it was of record that Prince

Bismarck fought thirty-two of these duels in a single summer

term when he was in college.  So he fought twenty-nine

after his badge had given him the right to retire from

the field.



1.  FROM MY DIARY.--Dined in a hotel a few miles up the Neckar,

    in a room whose walls were hung all over with framed

    portrait-groups of the Five Corps; some were recent,

    but many antedated photography, and were pictured in

    lithography--the dates ranged back to forty or fifty

    years ago.  Nearly every individual wore the ribbon across

    his breast.  In one portrait-group representing (as each

    of these pictures did) an entire Corps, I took pains

    to count the ribbons: there were twenty-seven members,

    and twenty-one of them wore that significant badge.



The statistics may be found to possess interest in

several particulars.  Two days in every week are devoted

to dueling.  The rule is rigid that there must be three

duels on each of these days; there are generally more,

but there cannot be fewer.  There were six the day

I was present; sometimes there are seven or eight.

It is insisted that eight duels a week--four for each

of the two days--is too low an average to draw a

calculation from, but I will reckon from that basis,

preferring an understatement to an overstatement of the case.

This requires about four hundred and eighty or five hundred

duelists a year--for in summer the college term is about

three and a half months, and in winter it is four months

and sometimes longer.  Of the seven hundred and fifty

students in the university at the time I am writing of,

only eighty belonged to the five corps, and it is only

these corps that do the dueling; occasionally other

students borrow the arms and battleground of the five corps

in order to settle a quarrel, but this does not happen

every dueling-day. [2] Consequently eighty youths furnish

the material for some two hundred and fifty duels a year.

This average gives six fights a year to each of the eighty.

This large work could not be accomplished if the badge-holders

stood upon their privilege and ceased to volunteer.



2.  They have to borrow the arms because they could not

    get them elsewhere or otherwise.  As I understand it,

    the public authorities, all over Germany, allow the five

    Corps to keep swords, but DO NOT ALLOW THEM TO USE THEM.

    This is law is rigid; it is only the execution of it that

    is lax.



Of course, where there is so much fighting, the students

make it a point to keep themselves in constant practice

with the foil.  One often sees them, at the tables in the

Castle grounds, using their whips or canes to illustrate

some new sword trick which they have heard about;

and between the duels, on the day whose history I

have been writing, the swords were not always idle;

every now and then we heard a succession of the keen

hissing sounds which the sword makes when it is being

put through its paces in the air, and this informed us

that a student was practicing.  Necessarily, this unceasing

attention to the art develops an expert occasionally.

He becomes famous in his own university, his renown spreads

to other universities.  He is invited to Goettingen,

to fight with a Goettingen expert; if he is victorious,

he will be invited to other colleges, or those colleges will

send their experts to him.  Americans and Englishmen often

join one or another of the five corps.  A year or two ago,

the principal Heidelberg expert was a big Kentuckian;

he was invited to the various universities and left

a wake of victory behind him all about Germany;

but at last a little student in Strasburg defeated him.

There was formerly a student in Heidelberg who had picked

up somewhere and mastered a peculiar trick of cutting up

under instead of cleaving down from above.  While the trick

lasted he won in sixteen successive duels in his university;

but by that time observers had discovered what his charm was,

and how to break it, therefore his championship ceased.



A rule which forbids social intercourse between members

of different corps is strict.  In the dueling-house, in

the parks, on the street, and anywhere and everywhere that

the students go, caps of a color group themselves together.

If all the tables in a public garden were crowded

but one, and that one had two red-cap students at it

and ten vacant places, the yellow-caps, the blue-caps,

the white caps, and the green caps, seeking seats,

would go by that table and not seem to see it, nor seem

to be aware that there was such a table in the grounds.

The student by whose courtesy we had been enabled to visit

the dueling-place, wore the white cap--Prussian Corps.

He introduced us to many white caps, but to none of

another color.  The corps etiquette extended even to us,

who were strangers, and required us to group with the white

corps only, and speak only with the white corps, while we

were their guests, and keep aloof from the caps of the

other colors.  Once I wished to examine some of the swords,

but an American student said, "It would not be quite polite;

these now in the windows all have red hilts or blue;

they will bring in some with white hilts presently,

and those you can handle freely.  "When a sword was broken

in the first duel, I wanted a piece of it; but its hilt

was the wrong color, so it was considered best and politest

to await a properer season.  It was brought to me after

the room was cleared, and I will now make a "life-size"

sketch of it by tracing a line around it with my pen,

to show the width of the weapon.  [Figure 1] The length of

these swords is about three feet, and they are quite heavy.

One's disposition to cheer, during the course of the

duels or at their close, was naturally strong, but corps

etiquette forbade any demonstrations of this sort.

However brilliant a contest or a victory might be,

no sign or sound betrayed that any one was moved.

A dignified gravity and repression were maintained at

all times.



When the dueling was finished and we were ready to go,

the gentlemen of the Prussian Corps to whom we had been

introduced took off their caps in the courteous German way,

and also shook hands; their brethren of the same order

took off their caps and bowed, but without shaking hands;

the gentlemen of the other corps treated us just as

they would have treated white caps--they fell apart,

apparently unconsciously, and left us an unobstructed pathway,

but did not seem to see us or know we were there.

If we had gone thither the following week as guests of

another corps, the white caps, without meaning any offense,

would have observed the etiquette of their order and ignored

our presence.



[How strangely are comedy and tragedy blended in this life!

I had not been home a full half-hour, after witnessing

those playful sham-duels, when circumstances made it

necessary for me to get ready immediately to assist

personally at a real one--a duel with no effeminate

limitation in the matter of results, but a battle

to the death.  An account of it, in the next chapter,

will show the reader that duels between boys, for fun,

and duels between men in earnest, are very different affairs.]







CHAPTER VIII

The Great French Duel

[I Second Gambetta in a Terrific Duel]



Much as the modern French duel is ridiculed by certain

smart people, it is in reality one of the most dangerous

institutions of our day.  Since it is always fought in the

open air, the combatants are nearly sure to catch cold.

M. Paul de Cassagnac, the most inveterate of the French

duelists, had suffered so often in this way that he is at

last a confirmed invalid; and the best physician in Paris

has expressed the opinion that if he goes on dueling for

fifteen or twenty years more--unless he forms the habit

of fighting in a comfortable room where damps and draughts

cannot intrude--he will eventually endanger his life.

This ought to moderate the talk of those people who are

so stubborn in maintaining that the French duel is the

most health-giving of recreations because of the open-air

exercise it affords.  And it ought also to moderate that

foolish talk about French duelists and socialist-hated

monarchs being the only people who are immoral.



But it is time to get at my subject.  As soon as I heard

of the late fiery outbreak between M. Gambetta and M. Fourtou

in the French Assembly, I knew that trouble must follow.

I knew it because a long personal friendship with

M. Gambetta revealed to me the desperate and implacable

nature of the man.  Vast as are his physical proportions,

I knew that the thirst for revenge would penetrate

to the remotest frontiers of his person.



I did not wait for him to call on me, but went at once

to him.  As I had expected, I found the brave fellow

steeped in a profound French calm.  I say French calm,

because French calmness and English calmness have points

of difference.  He was moving swiftly back and forth

among the debris of his furniture, now and then staving

chance fragments of it across the room with his foot;

grinding a constant grist of curses through his set teeth;

and halting every little while to deposit another handful

of his hair on the pile which he had been building of it on

the table.



He threw his arms around my neck, bent me over his stomach

to his breast, kissed me on both cheeks, hugged me four

or five times, and then placed me in his own arm-chair.

As soon as I had got well again, we began business at once.



I said I supposed he would wish me to act as his second,

and he said, "Of course." I said I must be allowed

to act under a French name, so that I might be shielded

from obloquy in my country, in case of fatal results.

He winced here, probably at the suggestion that dueling was

not regarded with respect in America.  However, he agreed

to my requirement.  This accounts for the fact that in all

the newspaper reports M. Gambetta's second was apparently

a Frenchman.



First, we drew up my principal's will.  I insisted upon this,

and stuck to my point.  I said I had never heard of a man

in his right mind going out to fight a duel without

first making his will.  He said he had never heard

of a man in his right mind doing anything of the kind.

When he had finished the will, he wished to proceed

to a choice of his "last words." He wanted to know

how the following words, as a dying exclamation, struck me:



"I die for my God, for my country, for freedom of speech,

for progress, and the universal brotherhood of man!"



I objected that this would require too lingering a death;

it was a good speech for a consumptive, but not suited

to the exigencies of the field of honor.  We wrangled

over a good many ante-mortem outbursts, but I finally got

him to cut his obituary down to this, which he copied

into his memorandum-book, purposing to get it by heart:



"I DIE THAT FRANCE MIGHT LIVE."



I said that this remark seemed to lack relevancy; but he

said relevancy was a matter of no consequence in last words,

what you wanted was thrill.



The next thing in order was the choice of weapons.

My principal said he was not feeling well, and would leave

that and the other details of the proposed meeting to me.

Therefore I wrote the following note and carried it to

M. Fourtou's friend:



Sir: M. Gambetta accepts M. Fourtou's challenge,

and authorizes me to propose Plessis-Piquet as the place

of meeting; tomorrow morning at daybreak as the time;

and axes as the weapons.



I am, sir, with great respect,



Mark Twain.



M. Fourtou's friend read this note, and shuddered.

Then he turned to me, and said, with a suggestion of

severity in his tone:



"Have you considered, sir, what would be the inevitable

result of such a meeting as this?"



"Well, for instance, what WOULD it be?"



"Bloodshed!"



"That's about the size of it," I said.  "Now, if it is

a fair question, what was your side proposing to shed?"



I had him there.  He saw he had made a blunder, so he hastened

to explain it away.  He said he had spoken jestingly.

Then he added that he and his principal would enjoy axes,

and indeed prefer them, but such weapons were barred

by the French code, and so I must change my proposal.



I walked the floor, turning the thing over in my mind,

and finally it occurred to me that Gatling-guns at fifteen

paces would be a likely way to get a verdict on the field

of honor.  So I framed this idea into a proposition.



But it was not accepted.  The code was in the way again.

I proposed rifles; then double-barreled shotguns;

then Colt's navy revolvers.  These being all rejected,

I reflected awhile, and sarcastically suggested brickbats

at three-quarters of a mile.  I always hate to fool away

a humorous thing on a person who has no perception of humor;

and it filled me with bitterness when this man went soberly

away to submit the last proposition to his principal.



He came back presently and said his principal was charmed

with the idea of brickbats at three-quarters of a mile,

but must decline on account of the danger to disinterested

parties passing between them.  Then I said:



"Well, I am at the end of my string, now.  Perhaps YOU

would be good enough to suggest a weapon? Perhaps you

have even had one in your mind all the time?"



His countenance brightened, and he said with alacrity:



"Oh, without doubt, monsieur!"



So he fell to hunting in his pockets--pocket after pocket,

and he had plenty of them--muttering all the while,

"Now, what could I have done with them?"



At last he was successful.  He fished out of his vest pocket

a couple of little things which I carried to the light

and ascertained to be pistols.  They were single-barreled

and silver-mounted, and very dainty and pretty.

I was not able to speak for emotion.  I silently hung

one of them on my watch-chain, and returned the other.

My companion in crime now unrolled a postage-stamp

containing several cartridges, and gave me one of them.

I asked if he meant to signify by this that our men were

to be allowed but one shot apiece.  He replied that the

French code permitted no more.  I then begged him to go

and suggest a distance, for my mind was growing weak

and confused under the strain which had been put upon it.

He named sixty-five yards.  I nearly lost my patience.

I said:



"Sixty-five yards, with these instruments? Squirt-guns

would be deadlier at fifty.  Consider, my friend,

you and I are banded together to destroy life, not make

it eternal."



But with all my persuasions, all my arguments, I was only

able to get him to reduce the distance to thirty-five yards;

and even this concession he made with reluctance,

and said with a sigh, "I wash my hands of this slaughter;

on your head be it."



There was nothing for me but to go home to my old

lion-heart and tell my humiliating story.  When I entered,

M. Gambetta was laying his last lock of hair upon the altar.

He sprang toward me, exclaiming:



"You have made the fatal arrangements--I see it in your eye!"



"I have."



His face paled a trifle, and he leaned upon the table

for support.  He breathed thick and heavily for a moment

or two, so tumultuous were his feelings; then he hoarsely

whispered:



"The weapon, the weapon! Quick! what is the weapon?"



"This!" and I displayed that silver-mounted thing.

He cast but one glance at it, then swooned ponderously

to the floor.



When he came to, he said mournfully:



"The unnatural calm to which I have subjected myself

has told upon my nerves.  But away with weakness!

I will confront my fate like a man and a Frenchman."



He rose to his feet, and assumed an attitude which

for sublimity has never been approached by man,

and has seldom been surpassed by statues.  Then he said,

in his deep bass tones:



"Behold, I am calm, I am ready; reveal to me the distance."



"Thirty-five yards." ...



I could not lift him up, of course; but I rolled him over,

and poured water down his back.  He presently came to,

and said:



"Thirty-five yards--without a rest? But why ask? Since

murder was that man's intention, why should he palter

with small details? But mark you one thing: in my fall

the world shall see how the chivalry of France meets death."



After a long silence he asked:



"Was nothing said about that man's family standing

up with him, as an offset to my bulk? But no matter;

I would not stoop to make such a suggestion; if he is

not noble enough to suggest it himself, he is welcome

to this advantage, which no honorable man would take."



He now sank into a sort of stupor of reflection,

which lasted some minutes; after which he broke silence with:



"The hour--what is the hour fixed for the collision?"



"Dawn, tomorrow."



He seemed greatly surprised, and immediately said:



"Insanity! I never heard of such a thing.  Nobody is

abroad at such an hour."



"That is the reason I named it.  Do you mean to say you

want an audience?"



"It is no time to bandy words.  I am astonished that M. Fourtou

should ever have agreed to so strange an innovation.

Go at once and require a later hour."



I ran downstairs, threw open the front door, and almost

plunged into the arms of M. Fourtou's second.  He said:



"I have the honor to say that my principal strenuously

objects to the hour chosen, and begs you will consent

to change it to half past nine."



"Any courtesy, sir, which it is in our power to extend

is at the service of your excellent principal.  We agree

to the proposed change of time."



"I beg you to accept the thanks of my client." Then he

turned to a person behind him, and said, "You hear, M. Noir,

the hour is altered to half past nine."  Whereupon

M. Noir bowed, expressed his thanks, and went away.

My accomplice continued:



"If agreeable to you, your chief surgeons and ours shall

proceed to the field in the same carriage as is customary."



"It is entirely agreeable to me, and I am obliged

to you for mentioning the surgeons, for I am afraid

I should not have thought of them.  How many shall

I want? I supposed two or three will be enough?"



"Two is the customary number for each party.  I refer

to 'chief' surgeons; but considering the exalted positions

occupied by our clients, it will be well and decorous

that each of us appoint several consulting surgeons,

from among the highest in the profession.  These will

come in their own private carriages.  Have you engaged

a hearse?"



"Bless my stupidity, I never thought of it! I will attend

to it right away.  I must seem very ignorant to you;

but you must try to overlook that, because I have never

had any experience of such a swell duel as this before.

I have had a good deal to do with duels on the Pacific coast,

but I see now that they were crude affairs.  A hearse--sho!

we used to leave the elected lying around loose, and let

anybody cord them up and cart them off that wanted to.

Have you anything further to suggest?"



"Nothing, except that the head undertakers shall ride together,

as is usual.  The subordinates and mutes will go on foot,

as is also usual.  I will see you at eight o'clock

in the morning, and we will then arrange the order

of the procession.  I have the honor to bid you a good day."



I returned to my client, who said, "Very well;

at what hour is the engagement to begin?"



"Half past nine."



"Very good indeed.; Have you sent the fact to the newspapers?"



"SIR! If after our long and intimate friendship you can

for a moment deem me capable of so base a treachery--"



"Tut, tut! What words are these, my dear friend? Have I

wounded you? Ah, forgive me; I am overloading you with labor.

Therefore go on with the other details, and drop this

one from your list.  The bloody-minded Fourtou will be

sure to attend to it.  Or I myself--yes, to make certain,

I will drop a note to my journalistic friend, M. Noir--"



"Oh, come to think of it, you may save yourself the trouble;

that other second has informed M. Noir."



"H'm! I might have known it.  It is just like that Fourtou,

who always wants to make a display."



At half past nine in the morning the procession approached

the field of Plessis-Piquet in the following order: first

came our carriage--nobody in it but M. Gambetta and myself;

then a carriage containing M. Fourtou and his second;

then a carriage containing two poet-orators who did

not believe in God, and these had MS.  funeral orations

projecting from their breast pockets; then a carriage

containing the head surgeons and their cases of instruments;

then eight private carriages containing consulting surgeons;

then a hack containing a coroner; then the two hearses;

then a carriage containing the head undertakers;

then a train of assistants and mutes on foot; and after

these came plodding through the fog a long procession

of camp followers, police, and citizens generally.

It was a noble turnout, and would have made a fine display

if we had had thinner weather.



There was no conversation.  I spoke several times to

my principal, but I judge he was not aware of it, for he

always referred to his note-book and muttered absently,

"I die that France might live."



Arrived on the field, my fellow-second and I paced off

the thirty-five yards, and then drew lots for choice

of position.  This latter was but an ornamental ceremony,

for all the choices were alike in such weather.

These preliminaries being ended, I went to my principal

and asked him if he was ready.  He spread himself out

to his full width, and said in a stern voice, "Ready! Let

the batteries be charged."



The loading process was done in the presence of duly

constituted witnesses.  We considered it best to perform

this delicate service with the assistance of a lantern,

on account of the state of the weather.  We now placed

our men.



At this point the police noticed that the public had massed

themselves together on the right and left of the field;

they therefore begged a delay, while they should put

these poor people in a place of safety.



The request was granted.



The police having ordered the two multitudes to take

positions behind the duelists, we were once more ready.

The weather growing still more opaque, it was agreed between

myself and the other second that before giving the fatal

signal we should each deliver a loud whoop to enable

the combatants to ascertain each other's whereabouts.



I now returned to my principal, and was distressed

to observe that he had lost a good deal of his spirit.

I tried my best to hearten him.  I said, "Indeed, sir,

things are not as bad as they seem.  Considering the character

of the weapons, the limited number of shots allowed,

the generous distance, the impenetrable solidity of the fog,

and the added fact that one of the combatants is one-eyed

and the other cross-eyed and near-sighted, it seems to me

that this conflict need not necessarily be fatal.  There are

chances that both of you may survive.  Therefore, cheer up;

do not be downhearted."



This speech had so good an effect that my principal

immediately stretched forth his hand and said, "I am

myself again; give me the weapon."



I laid it, all lonely and forlorn, in the center of the vast

solitude of his palm.  He gazed at it and shuddered.

And still mournfully contemplating it, he murmured in a

broken voice:



"Alas, it is not death I dread, but mutilation."



I heartened him once more, and with such success that he

presently said, "Let the tragedy begin.  Stand at my back;

do not desert me in this solemn hour, my friend."



I gave him my promise.  I now assisted him to point

his pistol toward the spot where I judged his adversary

to be standing, and cautioned him to listen well and

further guide himself by my fellow-second's whoop.

Then I propped myself against M. Gambetta's back,

and raised a rousing "Whoop-ee!" This was answered from

out the far distances of the fog, and I immediately shouted:



"One--two--three--FIRE!"



Two little sounds like SPIT! SPIT! broke upon my ear,

and in the same instant I was crushed to the earth under

a mountain of flesh.  Bruised as I was, I was still able

to catch a faint accent from above, to this effect:



"I die for... for ... perdition take it,

what IS it I die for? ... oh, yes--FRANCE! I die

that France may live!"



The surgeons swarmed around with their probes in

their hands, and applied their microscopes to the whole

area of M. Gambetta's person, with the happy result of

finding nothing in the nature of a wound.  Then a scene

ensued which was in every way gratifying and inspiriting.



The two gladiators fell upon each other's neck, with floods

of proud and happy tears; that other second embraced me;

the surgeons, the orators, the undertakers, the police,

everybody embraced, everybody congratulated, everybody cried,

and the whole atmosphere was filled with praise and with

joy unspeakable.



It seems to me then that I would rather be a hero

of a French duel than a crowned and sceptered monarch.



When the commotion had somewhat subsided, the body

of surgeons held a consultation, and after a good deal

of debate decided that with proper care and nursing there

was reason to believe that I would survive my injuries.

My internal hurts were deemed the most serious, since it

was apparent that a broken rib had penetrated my left lung,

and that many of my organs had been pressed out so far

to one side or the other of where they belonged, that it

was doubtful if they would ever learn to perform their

functions in such remote and unaccustomed localities.

They then set my left arm in two places, pulled my right

hip into its socket again, and re-elevated my nose.

I was an object of great interest, and even admiration;

and many sincere and warm-hearted persons had themselves

introduced to me, and said they were proud to know

the only man who had been hurt in a French duel in

forty years.



I was placed in an ambulance at the very head of the procession;

and thus with gratifying 'ECLAT I was marched into Paris,

the most conspicuous figure in that great spectacle,

and deposited at the hospital.



The cross of the Legion of Honor has been conferred

upon me.  However, few escape that distinction.



Such is the true version of the most memorable private

conflict of the age.



I have no complaints to make against any one.  I acted

for myself, and I can stand the consequences.



Without boasting, I think I may say I am not afraid

to stand before a modern French duelist, but as long

as I keep in my right mind I will never consent to stand

behind one again.







CHAPTER IX

[What the Beautiful Maiden Said]



One day we took the train and went down to Mannheim

to see "King Lear" played in German.  It was a mistake.

We sat in our seats three whole hours and never understood

anything but the thunder and lightning; and even that

was reversed to suit German ideas, for the thunder came

first and the lightning followed after.



The behavior of the audience was perfect.  There were

no rustlings, or whisperings, or other little disturbances;

each act was listened to in silence, and the applauding

was done after the curtain was down.  The doors opened at

half past four, the play began promptly at half past five,

and within two minutes afterward all who were coming were

in their seats, and quiet reigned.  A German gentleman

in the train had said that a Shakespearian play was an

appreciated treat in Germany and that we should find the

house filled.  It was true; all the six tiers were filled,

and remained so to the end--which suggested that it is

not only balcony people who like Shakespeare in Germany,

but those of the pit and gallery, too.



Another time, we went to Mannheim and attended a shivaree

--otherwise an opera--the one called "Lohengrin." The

banging and slamming and booming and crashing were

something beyond belief.  The racking and pitiless

pain of it remains stored up in my memory alongside

the memory of the time that I had my teeth fixed.

There were circumstances which made it necessary for me

to stay through the hour hours to the end, and I stayed;

but the recollection of that long, dragging, relentless season

of suffering is indestructible.  To have to endure it

in silence, and sitting still, made it all the harder.

I was in a railed compartment with eight or ten strangers,

of the two sexes, and this compelled repression;

yet at times the pain was so exquisite that I could hardly

keep the tears back.  At those times, as the howlings

and wailings and shrieking of the singers, and the ragings

and roarings and explosions of the vast orchestra rose

higher and higher, and wilder and wilder, and fiercer

and fiercer, I could have cried if I had been alone.

Those strangers would not have been surprised to see

a man do such a thing who was being gradually skinned,

but they would have marveled at it here, and made remarks

about it no doubt, whereas there was nothing in the

present case which was an advantage over being skinned.

There was a wait of half an hour at the end of the first act,

and I could not trust myself to do it, for I felt that I

should desert to stay out.  There was another wait

of half an hour toward nine o'clock, but I had gone

through so much by that time that I had no spirit left,

and so had no desire but to be let alone.



I do not wish to suggest that the rest of the people there

were like me, for, indeed, they were not.  Whether it

was that they naturally liked that noise, or whether it

was that they had learned to like it by getting used to it,

I did not at the time know; but they did like--this was

plain enough.  While it was going on they sat and looked

as rapt and grateful as cats do when one strokes their backs;

and whenever the curtain fell they rose to their feet,

in one solid mighty multitude, and the air was snowed thick

with waving handkerchiefs, and hurricanes of applause

swept the place.  This was not comprehensible to me.

Of course, there were many people there who were not

under compulsion to stay; yet the tiers were as full at

the close as they had been at the beginning.  This showed

that the people liked it.



It was a curious sort of a play.  In the manner

of costumes and scenery it was fine and showy enough;

but there was not much action.  That is to say,

there was not much really done, it was only talked about;

and always violently.  It was what one might call a

narrative play.  Everybody had a narrative and a grievance,

and none were reasonable about it, but all in an offensive

and ungovernable state.  There was little of that sort

of customary thing where the tenor and the soprano stand

down by the footlights, warbling, with blended voices,

and keep holding out their arms toward each other and drawing

them back and spreading both hands over first one breast

and then the other with a shake and a pressure--no,

it was every rioter for himself and no blending.

Each sang his indictive narrative in turn, accompanied by

the whole orchestra of sixty instruments, and when this had

continued for some time, and one was hoping they might come

to an understanding and modify the noise, a great chorus

composed entirely of maniacs would suddenly break forth,

and then during two minutes, and sometimes three, I lived

over again all that I suffered the time the orphan asylum burned

down.



We only had one brief little season of heaven and heaven's

sweet ecstasy and peace during all this long and diligent

and acrimonious reproduction of the other place.

This was while a gorgeous procession of people marched around

and around, in the third act, and sang the Wedding Chorus.

To my untutored ear that was music--almost divine music.

While my seared soul was steeped in the healing balm

of those gracious sounds, it seemed to me that I could

almost resuffer the torments which had gone before,

in order to be so healed again.  There is where the deep

ingenuity of the operatic idea is betrayed.  It deals so

largely in pain that its scattered delights are prodigiously

augmented by the contrasts.  A pretty air in an opera is

prettier there than it could be anywhere else, I suppose,

just as an honest man in politics shines more than he

would elsewhere.



I have since found out that there is nothing the Germans

like so much as an opera.  They like it, not in a mild

and moderate way, but with their whole hearts.

This is a legitimate result of habit and education.

Our nation will like the opera, too, by and by, no doubt.

One in fifty of those who attend our operas likes

it already, perhaps, but I think a good many of the other

forty-nine go in order to learn to like it, and the

rest in order to be able to talk knowingly about it.

The latter usually hum the airs while they are being sung,

so that their neighbors may perceive that they have been

to operas before.  The funerals of these do not occur

often enough.



A gentle, old-maidish person and a sweet young girl

of seventeen sat right in front of us that night at the

Mannheim opera.  These people talked, between the acts,

and I understood them, though I understood nothing

that was uttered on the distant stage.  At first they

were guarded in their talk, but after they had heard

my agent and me conversing in English they dropped their

reserve and I picked up many of their little confidences;

no, I mean many of HER little confidences--meaning

the elder party--for the young girl only listened,

and gave assenting nods, but never said a word.  How pretty

she was, and how sweet she was! I wished she would speak.

But evidently she was absorbed in her own thoughts,

her own young-girl dreams, and found a dearer pleasure

in silence.  But she was not dreaming sleepy dreams--no,

she was awake, alive, alert, she could not sit still

a moment.  She was an enchanting study.  Her gown was

of a soft white silky stuff that clung to her round

young figure like a fish's skin, and it was rippled

over with the gracefulest little fringy films of lace;

she had deep, tender eyes, with long, curved lashes;

and she had peachy cheeks, and a dimpled chin, and such

a dear little rosebud of a mouth; and she was so dovelike,

so pure, and so gracious, so sweet and so bewitching.

For long hours I did mightily wish she would speak.

And at last she did; the red lips parted, and out leaps her

thought--and with such a guileless and pretty enthusiasm,

too: "Auntie, I just KNOW I've got five hundred fleas

on me!"



That was probably over the average.  Yes, it must have been

very much over the average.  The average at that time

in the Grand Duchy of Baden was forty-five to a young

person (when alone), according to the official estimate

of the home secretary for that year; the average for older

people was shifty and indeterminable, for whenever a

wholesome young girl came into the presence of her elders

she immediately lowered their average and raised her own.

She became a sort of contribution-box. This dear young

thing in the theater had been sitting there unconsciously

taking up a collection.  Many a skinny old being in our

neighborhood was the happier and the restfuler for her coming.



In that large audience, that night, there were eight very

conspicuous people.  These were ladies who had their hats

or bonnets on.  What a blessed thing it would be if a lady

could make herself conspicuous in our theaters by wearing

her hat.  It is not usual in Europe to allow ladies

and gentlemen to take bonnets, hats, overcoats, canes,

or umbrellas into the auditorium, but in Mannheim this

rule was not enforced because the audiences were largely

made up of people from a distance, and among these were

always a few timid ladies who were afraid that if they had

to go into an anteroom to get their things when the play

was over, they would miss their train.  But the great mass

of those who came from a distance always ran the risk

and took the chances, preferring the loss of a train

to a breach of good manners and the discomfort of being

unpleasantly conspicuous during a stretch of three or four hours.









CHAPTER X

[How Wagner Operas Bang Along]



Three or four hours.  That is a long time to sit in one place,

whether one be conspicuous or not, yet some of Wagner's

operas bang along for six whole hours on a stretch!

But the people sit there and enjoy it all, and wish it

would last longer.  A German lady in Munich told me

that a person could not like Wagner's music at first,

but must go through the deliberate process of learning

to like it--then he would have his sure reward;

for when he had learned to like it he would hunger

for it and never be able to get enough of it.  She said

that six hours of Wagner was by no means too much.

She said that this composer had made a complete revolution

in music and was burying the old masters one by one.

And she said that Wagner's operas differed from all others

in one notable respect, and that was that they were not

merely spotted with music here and there, but were ALL music,

from the first strain to the last.  This surprised me.

I said I had attended one of his insurrections, and found

hardly ANY music in it except the Wedding Chorus.

She said "Lohengrin" was noisier than Wagner's other operas,

but that if I would keep on going to see it I would find

by and by that it was all music, and therefore would

then enjoy it.  I COULD have said, "But would you advise

a person to deliberately practice having a toothache

in the pit of his stomach for a couple of years in order

that he might then come to enjoy it?" But I reserved

that remark.



This lady was full of the praises of the head-tenor

who had performed in a Wagner opera the night before,

and went on to enlarge upon his old and prodigious fame,

and how many honors had been lavished upon him by the

princely houses of Germany.  Here was another surprise.

I had attended that very opera, in the person of my agent,

and had made close and accurate observations.  So I

said:



"Why, madam, MY experience warrants me in stating

that that tenor's voice is not a voice at all,

but only a shriek--the shriek of a hyena."



"That is very true," she said; "he cannot sing now;

it is already many years that he has lost his voice,

but in other times he sang, yes, divinely! So whenever

he comes now, you shall see, yes, that the theater

will not hold the people.  JAWOHL BEI GOTT! his voice

is WUNDERSCHOEN in that past time."



I said she was discovering to me a kindly trait in the

Germans which was worth emulating.  I said that over

the water we were not quite so generous; that with us,

when a singer had lost his voice and a jumper had lost

his legs, these parties ceased to draw.  I said I had been

to the opera in Hanover, once, and in Mannheim once,

and in Munich (through my authorized agent) once, and this

large experience had nearly persuaded me that the Germans

PREFERRED singers who couldn't sing.  This was not such

a very extravagant speech, either, for that burly Mannheim

tenor's praises had been the talk of all Heidelberg for

a week before his performance took place--yet his voice

was like the distressing noise which a nail makes when you

screech it across a window-pane. I said so to Heidelberg

friends the next day, and they said, in the calmest and

simplest way, that that was very true, but that in earlier

times his voice HAD been wonderfully fine.  And the tenor

in Hanover was just another example of this sort.

The English-speaking German gentleman who went with me

to the opera there was brimming with enthusiasm over that tenor.

He said:



"ACH GOTT! a great man! You shall see him.  He is so celebrate

in all Germany--and he has a pension, yes, from the government.

He not obliged to sing now, only twice every year;

but if he not sing twice each year they take him his pension

away."



Very well, we went.  When the renowned old tenor appeared,

I got a nudge and an excited whisper:



"Now you see him!"



But the "celebrate" was an astonishing disappointment to me.

If he had been behind a screen I should have supposed

they were performing a surgical operation on him.

I looked at my friend--to my great surprise he seemed

intoxicated with pleasure, his eyes were dancing

with eager delight.  When the curtain at last fell,

he burst into the stormiest applause, and kept it up--as

did the whole house--until the afflictive tenor had

come three times before the curtain to make his bow.

While the glowing enthusiast was swabbing the perspiration

from his face, I said:



"I don't mean the least harm, but really, now, do you

think he can sing?"



"Him? NO! GOTT IM HIMMEL, ABER, how he has been able to

sing twenty-five years ago?" [Then pensively.] "ACH, no,

NOW he not sing any more, he only cry.  When he think

he sing, now, he not sing at all, no, he only make

like a cat which is unwell."



Where and how did we get the idea that the Germans

are a stolid, phlegmatic race? In truth, they are

widely removed from that.  They are warm-hearted,

emotional, impulsive, enthusiastic, their tears come

at the mildest touch, and it is not hard to move them

to laughter.  They are the very children of impulse.

We are cold and self-contained, compared to the Germans.

They hug and kiss and cry and shout and dance and sing;

and where we use one loving, petting expressions they pour

out a score.  Their language is full of endearing diminutives;

nothing that they love escapes the application of a petting

diminutive--neither the house, nor the dog, nor the horse,

nor the grandmother, nor any other creature, animate or

inanimate.



In the theaters at Hanover, Hamburg, and Mannheim,

they had a wise custom.  The moment the curtain went up,

the light in the body of the house went down.

The audience sat in the cool gloom of a deep twilight,

which greatly enhanced the glowing splendors of the stage.

It saved gas, too, and people were not sweated to death.



When I saw "King Lear" played, nobody was allowed to see

a scene shifted; if there was nothing to be done but slide

a forest out of the way and expose a temple beyond, one did

not see that forest split itself in the middle and go

shrieking away, with the accompanying disenchanting spectacle

of the hands and heels of the impelling impulse--no,

the curtain was always dropped for an instant--one heard

not the least movement behind it--but when it went up,

the next instant, the forest was gone.  Even when the

stage was being entirely reset, one heard no noise.

During the whole time that "King Lear" was playing

the curtain was never down two minutes at any one time.

The orchestra played until the curtain was ready to go up

for the first time, then they departed for the evening.

Where the stage waits never each two minutes there is no

occasion for music.  I had never seen this two-minute

business between acts but once before, and that was when

the "Shaughraun" was played at Wallack's.



I was at a concert in Munich one night, the people

were streaming in, the clock-hand pointed to seven,

the music struck up, and instantly all movement in

the body of the house ceased--nobody was standing,

or walking up the aisles, or fumbling with a seat,

the stream of incomers had suddenly dried up at its source.

I listened undisturbed to a piece of music that was fifteen

minutes long--always expecting some tardy ticket-holders

to come crowding past my knees, and being continuously and

pleasantly disappointed--but when the last note was struck,

here came the stream again.  You see, they had made

those late comers wait in the comfortable waiting-parlor

from the time the music had begin until it was ended.



It was the first time I had ever seen this sort of

criminals denied the privilege of destroying the comfort

of a house full of their betters.  Some of these were

pretty fine birds, but no matter, they had to tarry

outside in the long parlor under the inspection of

a double rank of liveried footmen and waiting-maids

who supported the two walls with their backs and held

the wraps and traps of their masters and mistresses on their

arms.



We had no footmen to hold our things, and it was not

permissible to take them into the concert-room; but there

were some men and women to take charge of them for us.

They gave us checks for them and charged a fixed price,

payable in advance--five cents.



In Germany they always hear one thing at an opera

which has never yet been heard in America, perhaps--I

mean the closing strain of a fine solo or duet.

We always smash into it with an earthquake of applause.

The result is that we rob ourselves of the sweetest

part of the treat; we get the whiskey, but we don't get

the sugar in the bottom of the glass.



Our way of scattering applause along through an act seems

to me to be better than the Mannheim way of saving it

all up till the act is ended.  I do not see how an actor

can forget himself and portray hot passion before a cold

still audience.  I should think he would feel foolish.

It is a pain to me to this day, to remember how that old

German Lear raged and wept and howled around the stage,

with never a response from that hushed house, never a

single outburst till the act was ended.  To me there was

something unspeakably uncomfortable in the solemn dead

silences that always followed this old person's tremendous

outpourings of his feelings.  I could not help putting

myself in his place--I thought I knew how sick and flat

he felt during those silences, because I remembered a case

which came under my observation once, and which--but I

will tell the incident:



One evening on board a Mississippi steamboat, a boy of ten

years lay asleep in a berth--a long, slim-legged boy,

he was, encased in quite a short shirt; it was the first

time he had ever made a trip on a steamboat, and so he

was troubled, and scared, and had gone to bed with his

head filled with impending snaggings, and explosions,

and conflagrations, and sudden death.  About ten o'clock

some twenty ladies were sitting around about the ladies'

saloon, quietly reading, sewing, embroidering, and so on,

and among them sat a sweet, benignant old dame with round

spectacles on her nose and her busy knitting-needles

in her hands.  Now all of a sudden, into the midst of this

peaceful scene burst that slim-shanked boy in the brief shirt,

wild-eyed, erect-haired, and shouting, "Fire, fire!

JUMP AND RUN, THE BOAT'S AFIRE AND THERE AIN'T A MINUTE

TO LOSE!" All those ladies looked sweetly up and smiled,

nobody stirred, the old lady pulled her spectacles down,

looked over them, and said, gently:



"But you mustn't catch cold, child.  Run and put on

your breastpin, and then come and tell us all about it."



It was a cruel chill to give to a poor little devil's

gushing vehemence.  He was expecting to be a sort of

hero--the creator of a wild panic--and here everybody

sat and smiled a mocking smile, and an old woman made

fun of his bugbear.  I turned and crept away--for I

was that boy--and never even cared to discover whether

I had dreamed the fire or actually seen it.



I am told that in a German concert or opera, they hardly

ever encore a song; that though they may be dying to hear

it again, their good breeding usually preserves them

against requiring the repetition.



Kings may encore; that is quite another matter;

it delights everybody to see that the King is pleased;

and as to the actor encored, his pride and gratification

are simply boundless.  Still, there are circumstances

in which even a royal encore--



But it is better to illustrate.  The King of Bavaria is

a poet, and has a poet's eccentricities--with the advantage

over all other poets of being able to gratify them,

no matter what form they may take.  He is fond of opera,

but not fond of sitting in the presence of an audience;

therefore, it has sometimes occurred, in Munich,

that when an opera has been concluded and the players

were getting off their paint and finery, a command has

come to them to get their paint and finery on again.

Presently the King would arrive, solitary and alone,

and the players would begin at the beginning and do the

entire opera over again with only that one individual

in the vast solemn theater for audience.  Once he took

an odd freak into his head.  High up and out of sight,

over the prodigious stage of the court theater is a maze

of interlacing water-pipes, so pierced that in case

of fire, innumerable little thread-like streams of

water can be caused to descend; and in case of need,

this discharge can be augmented to a pouring flood.

American managers might want to make a note of that.

The King was sole audience.  The opera proceeded,

it was a piece with a storm in it; the mimic thunder

began to mutter, the mimic wind began to wail and sough,

and the mimic rain to patter.  The King's interest rose

higher and higher; it developed into enthusiasm.  He cried

out:



"It is very, very good, indeed! But I will have real

rain! Turn on the water!"



The manager pleaded for a reversal of the command; said it

would ruin the costly scenery and the splendid costumes,

but the King cried:



"No matter, no matter, I will have real rain! Turn

on the water!"



So the real rain was turned on and began to descend in

gossamer lances to the mimic flower-beds and gravel walks

of the stage.  The richly dressed actresses and actors

tripped about singing bravely and pretending not to mind it.

The King was delighted--his enthusiasm grew higher.

He cried out:



"Bravo, bravo! More thunder! more lightning! turn

on more rain!"



The thunder boomed, the lightning glared, the storm-winds raged,

the deluge poured down.  The mimic royalty on the stage,

with their soaked satins clinging to their bodies,

slopped about ankle-deep in water, warbling their sweetest

and best, the fiddlers under the eaves of the state sawed

away for dear life, with the cold overflow spouting down

the backs of their necks, and the dry and happy King sat

in his lofty box and wore his gloves to ribbons applauding.



"More yet!" cried the King; "more yet--let loose all

the thunder, turn on all the water! I will hang the man

that raises an umbrella!"



When this most tremendous and effective storm that had

ever been produced in any theater was at last over,

the King's approbation was measureless.  He cried:



"Magnificent, magnificent! ENCORE! Do it again!"



But the manager succeeded in persuading him to recall

the encore, and said the company would feel sufficiently

rewarded and complimented in the mere fact that the

encore was desired by his Majesty, without fatiguing

him with a repetition to gratify their own vanity.



During the remainder of the act the lucky performers

were those whose parts required changes of dress;

the others were a soaked, bedraggled, and uncomfortable lot,

but in the last degree picturesque.  The stage scenery

was ruined, trap-doors were so swollen that they wouldn't

work for a week afterward, the fine costumes were spoiled,

and no end of minor damages were done by that remarkable storm.



It was royal idea--that storm--and royally carried out.

But observe the moderation of the King; he did not

insist upon his encore.  If he had been a gladsome,

unreflecting American opera-audience, he probably would

have had his storm repeated and repeated until he drowned

all those people.







CHAPTER XI

[I Paint a "Turner"]



The summer days passed pleasantly in Heidelberg.

We had a skilled trainer, and under his instructions we

were getting our legs in the right condition for the

contemplated pedestrian tours; we were well satisfied

with the progress which we had made in the German language,

[1. See Appendix D for information concerning this

fearful tongue.] and more than satisfied with what we had

accomplished in art.  We had had the best instructors in

drawing and painting in Germany--Haemmerling, Vogel, Mueller,

Dietz, and Schumann.  Haemmerling taught us landscape-painting.

Vogel taught us figure-drawing, Mueller taught us to do

still-life, and Dietz and Schumann gave us a finishing

course in two specialties--battle-pieces and shipwrecks.

Whatever I am in Art I owe to these men.  I have something

of the manner of each and all of them; but they all said that I

had also a manner of my own, and that it was conspicuous.

They said there was a marked individuality about my

style--insomuch that if I ever painted the commonest

type of a dog, I should be sure to throw a something

into the aspect of that dog which would keep him from

being mistaken for the creation of any other artist.

Secretly I wanted to believe all these kind sayings,

but I could not; I was afraid that my masters'

partiality for me, and pride in me, biased their judgment.

So I resolved to make a test.  Privately, and unknown

to any one, I painted my great picture, "Heidelberg Castle

Illuminated"--my first really important work in oils--and

had it hung up in the midst of a wilderness of oil-pictures

in the Art Exhibition, with no name attached to it.  To my

great gratification it was instantly recognized as mine.

All the town flocked to see it, and people even came from

neighboring localities to visit it.  It made more stir than

any other work in the Exhibition.  But the most gratifying

thing of all was, that chance strangers, passing through,

who had not heard of my picture, were not only drawn to it,

as by a lodestone, the moment they entered the gallery,

but always took it for a "Turner."



Apparently nobody had ever done that.  There were ruined

castles on the overhanging cliffs and crags all the way;

these were said to have their legends, like those on the Rhine,

and what was better still, they had never been in print.

There was nothing in the books about that lovely region;

it had been neglected by the tourist, it was virgin soil for

the literary pioneer.



Meantime the knapsacks, the rough walking-suits and the stout

walking-shoes which we had ordered, were finished and brought

to us.  A Mr. X and a young Mr. Z had agreed to go with us.

We went around one evening and bade good-by to our friends,

and afterward had a little farewell banquet at the hotel.

We got to bed early, for we wanted to make an early start,

so as to take advantage of the cool of the morning.



We were out of bed at break of day, feeling fresh

and vigorous, and took a hearty breakfast, then plunged

down through the leafy arcades of the Castle grounds,

toward the town.  What a glorious summer morning it was,

and how the flowers did pour out their fragrance,

and how the birds did sing! It was just the time for a

tramp through the woods and mountains.



We were all dressed alike: broad slouch hats, to keep the

sun off; gray knapsacks; blue army shirts; blue overalls;

leathern gaiters buttoned tight from knee down to ankle;

high-quarter coarse shoes snugly laced.  Each man had

an opera-glass, a canteen, and a guide-book case slung

over his shoulder, and carried an alpenstock in one hand

and a sun-umbrella in the other.  Around our hats were

wound many folds of soft white muslin, with the ends

hanging and flapping down our backs--an idea brought

from the Orient and used by tourists all over Europe.

Harris carried the little watch-like machine called

a "pedometer," whose office is to keep count of a man's

steps and tell how far he has walked.  Everybody stopped

to admire our costumes and give us a hearty "Pleasant march

to you!"



When we got downtown I found that we could go by rail to

within five miles of Heilbronn.  The train was just starting,

so we jumped aboard and went tearing away in splendid spirits.

It was agreed all around that we had done wisely,

because it would be just as enjoyable to walk DOWN the Neckar

as up it, and it could not be needful to walk both ways.

There were some nice German people in our compartment.

I got to talking some pretty private matters presently,

and Harris became nervous; so he nudged me and said:



"Speak in German--these Germans may understand English."



I did so, it was well I did; for it turned out that there

was not a German in that party who did not understand

English perfectly.  It is curious how widespread our language

is in Germany.  After a while some of those folks got out

and a German gentleman and his two young daughters got in.

I spoke in German of one of the latter several times,

but without result.  Finally she said:



"ICH VERSTEHE NUR DEUTCH UND ENGLISHE,"--or words to

that effect.  That is, "I don't understand any language

but German and English."



And sure enough, not only she but her father and sister

spoke English.  So after that we had all the talk we wanted;

and we wanted a good deal, for they were agreeable people.

They were greatly interested in our customs; especially

the alpenstocks, for they had not seen any before.

They said that the Neckar road was perfectly level, so we

must be going to Switzerland or some other rugged country;

and asked us if we did not find the walking pretty fatiguing

in such warm weather.  But we said no.



We reached Wimpfen--I think it was Wimpfen--in about

three hours, and got out, not the least tired; found a

good hotel and ordered beer and dinner--then took

a stroll through the venerable old village.  It was very

picturesque and tumble-down, and dirty and interesting.

It had queer houses five hundred years old in it,

and a military tower 115 feet high, which had stood there

more than ten centuries.  I made a little sketch of it.

I kept a copy, but gave the original to the Burgomaster.

I think the original was better than the copy, because it

had more windows in it and the grass stood up better and had

a brisker look.  There was none around the tower, though;

I composed the grass myself, from studies I made in a field

by Heidelberg in Haemmerling's time.  The man on top,

looking at the view, is apparently too large, but I found

he could not be made smaller, conveniently.  I wanted

him there, and I wanted him visible, so I thought out a

way to manage it; I composed the picture from two points

of view; the spectator is to observe the man from bout

where that flag is, and he must observe the tower itself

from the ground.  This harmonizes the seeming discrepancy.

[Figure 2]



Near an old cathedral, under a shed, were three crosses

of stone--moldy and damaged things, bearing life-size

stone figures.  The two thieves were dressed in the fanciful

court costumes of the middle of the sixteenth century,

while the Saviour was nude, with the exception of a cloth

around the loins.



We had dinner under the green trees in a garden belonging

to the hotel and overlooking the Neckar; then, after a smoke,

we went to bed.  We had a refreshing nap, then got up

about three in the afternoon and put on our panoply.

As we tramped gaily out at the gate of the town,

we overtook a peasant's cart, partly laden with odds and

ends of cabbages and similar vegetable rubbish, and drawn

by a small cow and a smaller donkey yoked together.

It was a pretty slow concern, but it got us into Heilbronn

before dark--five miles, or possibly it was seven.



We stopped at the very same inn which the famous old

robber-knight and rough fighter Goetz von Berlichingen,

abode in after he got out of captivity in the Square Tower

of Heilbronn between three hundred and fifty and four hundred

years ago.  Harris and I occupied the same room which he

had occupied and the same paper had not quite peeled off

the walls yet.  The furniture was quaint old carved stuff,

full four hundred years old, and some of the smells

were over a thousand.  There was a hook in the wall,

which the landlord said the terrific old Goetz used to

hang his iron hand on when he took it off to go to bed.

This room was very large--it might be called immense

--and it was on the first floor; which means it was in

the second story, for in Europe the houses are so high

that they do not count the first story, else they

would get tired climbing before they got to the top.

The wallpaper was a fiery red, with huge gold figures in it,

well smirched by time, and it covered all the doors.

These doors fitted so snugly and continued the figures

of the paper so unbrokenly, that when they were closed

one had to go feeling and searching along the wall

to find them.  There was a stove in the corner--one

of those tall, square, stately white porcelain things

that looks like a monument and keeps you thinking

of death when you ought to be enjoying your travels.

The windows looked out on a little alley, and over that

into a stable and some poultry and pig yards in the rear

of some tenement-houses. There were the customary two beds

in the room, one in one end, the other in the other,

about an old-fashioned brass-mounted, single-barreled

pistol-shot apart.  They were fully as narrow as the usual

German bed, too, and had the German bed's ineradicable

habit of spilling the blankets on the floor every time

you forgot yourself and went to sleep.



A round table as large as King Arthur's stood in the

center of the room; while the waiters were getting

ready to serve our dinner on it we all went out to see

the renowned clock on the front of the municipal buildings.







CHAPTER XII

[What the Wives Saved]



The RATHHAUS, or municipal building, is of the quaintest

and most picturesque Middle-Age architecture.  It has a

massive portico and steps, before it, heavily balustraded,

and adorned with life-sized rusty iron knights in

complete armor.  The clock-face on the front of the building

is very large and of curious pattern.  Ordinarily, a gilded

angel strikes the hour on a big bell with a hammer;

as the striking ceases, a life-sized figure of Time raises

its hour-glass and turns it; two golden rams advance

and butt each other; a gilded cock lifts its wings;

but the main features are two great angels, who stand

on each side of the dial with long horns at their lips;

it was said that they blew melodious blasts on these

horns every hour--but they did not do it for us.

We were told, later, than they blew only at night,

when the town was still.



Within the RATHHAUS were a number of huge wild boars'

heads, preserved, and mounted on brackets along the wall;

they bore inscriptions telling who killed them and how many

hundred years ago it was done.  One room in the building

was devoted to the preservation of ancient archives.

There they showed us no end of aged documents; some were

signed by Popes, some by Tilly and other great generals,

and one was a letter written and subscribed by Goetz von

Berlichingen in Heilbronn in 1519 just after his release

from the Square Tower.



This fine old robber-knight was a devoutly and sincerely

religious man, hospitable, charitable to the poor,

fearless in fight, active, enterprising, and possessed

of a large and generous nature.  He had in him a

quality of being able to overlook moderate injuries,

and being able to forgive and forget mortal ones as

soon as he had soundly trounced the authors of them.

He was prompt to take up any poor devil's quarrel and risk

his neck to right him.  The common folk held him dear,

and his memory is still green in ballad and tradition.

He used to go on the highway and rob rich wayfarers;

and other times he would swoop down from his high castle

on the hills of the Neckar and capture passing cargoes

of merchandise.  In his memoirs he piously thanks the

Giver of all Good for remembering him in his needs and

delivering sundry such cargoes into his hands at times

when only special providences could have relieved him.

He was a doughty warrior and found a deep joy in battle.

In an assault upon a stronghold in Bavaria when he was

only twenty-three years old, his right hand was shot away,

but he was so interested in the fight that he did not

observe it for a while.  He said that the iron hand

which was made for him afterward, and which he wore for

more than half a century, was nearly as clever a member

as the fleshy one had been.  I was glad to get a facsimile

of the letter written by this fine old German Robin Hood,

though I was not able to read it.  He was a better artist

with his sword than with his pen.



We went down by the river and saw the Square Tower.

It was a very venerable structure, very strong,

and very ornamental.  There was no opening near the ground.

They had to use a ladder to get into it, no doubt.



We visited the principal church, also--a curious

old structure, with a towerlike spire adorned with all

sorts of grotesque images.  The inner walls of the church

were placarded with large mural tablets of copper,

bearing engraved inscriptions celebrating the merits

of old Heilbronn worthies of two or three centuries ago,

and also bearing rudely painted effigies of themselves

and their families tricked out in the queer costumes of

those days.  The head of the family sat in the foreground,

and beyond him extended a sharply receding and diminishing

row of sons; facing him sat his wife, and beyond

her extended a low row of diminishing daughters.

The family was usually large, but the perspective bad.



Then we hired the hack and the horse which Goetz von

Berlichingen used to use, and drove several miles into

the country to visit the place called WEIBERTREU--Wife's

Fidelity I suppose it means.  It was a feudal castle

of the Middle Ages.  When we reached its neighborhood we

found it was beautifully situated, but on top of a mound,

or hill, round and tolerably steep, and about two hundred

feet high.  Therefore, as the sun was blazing hot,

we did not climb up there, but took the place on trust,

and observed it from a distance while the horse leaned up

against a fence and rested.  The place has no interest

except that which is lent it by its legend, which is

a very pretty one--to this effect:



THE LEGEND



In the Middle Ages, a couple of young dukes, brothers,

took opposite sides in one of the wars, the one fighting

for the Emperor, the other against him.  One of them

owned the castle and village on top of the mound which I

have been speaking of, and in his absence his brother

came with his knights and soldiers and began a siege.

It was a long and tedious business, for the people

made a stubborn and faithful defense.  But at last

their supplies ran out and starvation began its work;

more fell by hunger than by the missiles of the enemy.

They by and by surrendered, and begged for charitable terms.

But the beleaguering prince was so incensed against them

for their long resistance that he said he would spare none

but the women and children--all men should be put to the

sword without exception, and all their goods destroyed.

Then the women came and fell on their knees and begged for

the lives of their husbands.



"No," said the prince, "not a man of them shall escape alive;

you yourselves shall go with your children into houseless

and friendless banishment; but that you may not starve

I grant you this one grace, that each woman may bear

with her from this place as much of her most valuable

property as she is able to carry."



Very well, presently the gates swung open and out filed

those women carrying their HUSBANDS on their shoulders.

The besiegers, furious at the trick, rushed forward

to slaughter the men, but the Duke stepped between and

said:



"No, put up your swords--a prince's word is inviolable."



When we got back to the hotel, King Arthur's Round Table

was ready for us in its white drapery, and the head waiter

and his first assistant, in swallow-tails and white cravats,

brought in the soup and the hot plates at once.



Mr. X had ordered the dinner, and when the wine came on,

he picked up a bottle, glanced at the label, and then turned

to the grave, the melancholy, the sepulchral head waiter

and said it was not the sort of wine he had asked for.

The head waiter picked up the bottle, cast his undertaker-eye

on it and said:



"It is true; I beg pardon." Then he turned on his

subordinate and calmly said, "Bring another label."



At the same time he slid the present label off with his hand

and laid it aside; it had been newly put on, its paste

was still wet.  When the new label came, he put it on;

our French wine being now turned into German wine,

according to desire, the head waiter went blandly about his

other duties, as if the working of this sort of miracle

was a common and easy thing to him.



Mr. X said he had not known, before, that there were

people honest enough to do this miracle in public,

but he was aware that thousands upon thousands of labels

were imported into America from Europe every year,

to enable dealers to furnish to their customers in a quiet

and inexpensive way all the different kinds of foreign

wines they might require.



We took a turn around the town, after dinner, and found

it fully as interesting in the moonlight as it had been

in the daytime.  The streets were narrow and roughly paved,

and there was not a sidewalk or a street-lamp anywhere.

The dwellings were centuries old, and vast enough for hotels.

They widened all the way up; the stories projected

further and further forward and aside as they ascended,

and the long rows of lighted windows, filled with little bits

of panes, curtained with figured white muslin and adorned

outside with boxes of flowers, made a pretty effect.

The moon was bright, and the light and shadow very strong;

and nothing could be more picturesque than those curving

streets, with their rows of huge high gables leaning

far over toward each other in a friendly gossiping way,

and the crowds below drifting through the alternating blots

of gloom and mellow bars of moonlight.  Nearly everybody

was abroad, chatting, singing, romping, or massed in lazy

comfortable attitudes in the doorways.



In one place there was a public building which was

fenced about with a thick, rusty chain, which sagged

from post to post in a succession of low swings.

The pavement, here, was made of heavy blocks of stone.

In the glare of the moon a party of barefooted children

were swinging on those chains and having a noisy good time.

They were not the first ones who have done that;

even their great-great-grandfathers had not been the first

to do it when they were children.  The strokes of the bare

feet had worn grooves inches deep in the stone flags;

it had taken many generations of swinging children to

accomplish that.  Everywhere in the town were the mold

and decay that go with antiquity, and evidence of it;

but I do not know that anything else gave us so vivid

a sense of the old age of Heilbronn as those footworn

grooves in the paving-stones.







CHAPTER XIII

[My Long Crawl in the Dark]



When we got back to the hotel I wound and set the

pedometer and put it in my pocket, for I was to carry

it next day and keep record of the miles we made.

The work which we had given the instrument to do during

the day which had just closed had not fatigued it perceptibly.



We were in bed by ten, for we wanted to be up and away on

our tramp homeward with the dawn.  I hung fire, but Harris

went to sleep at once.  I hate a man who goes to sleep

at once; there is a sort of indefinable something about it

which is not exactly an insult, and yet is an insolence;

and one which is hard to bear, too.  I lay there fretting

over this injury, and trying to go to sleep; but the harder

I tried, the wider awake I grew.  I got to feeling very lonely

in the dark, with no company but an undigested dinner.

My mind got a start by and by, and began to consider the

beginning of every subject which has ever been thought of;

but it never went further than the beginning; it was touch

and go; it fled from topic to topic with a frantic speed.

At the end of an hour my head was in a perfect whirl and I

was dead tired, fagged out.



The fatigue was so great that it presently began to make some

head against the nervous excitement; while imagining myself

wide awake, I would really doze into momentary unconsciousness,

and come suddenly out of it with a physical jerk which nearly

wrenched my joints apart--the delusion of the instant

being that I was tumbling backward over a precipice.

After I had fallen over eight or nine precipices and thus

found out that one half of my brain had been asleep eight

or nine times without the wide-awake, hard-working other

half suspecting it, the periodical unconsciousnesses

began to extend their spell gradually over more of my

brain-territory, and at last I sank into a drowse which

grew deeper and deeper and was doubtless just on the very

point of being a solid, blessed dreamless stupor, when--what was

that?



My dulled faculties dragged themselves partly back to life

and took a receptive attitude.  Now out of an immense,

a limitless distance, came a something which grew and grew,

and approached, and presently was recognizable as a sound

--it had rather seemed to be a feeling, before.  This sound

was a mile away, now--perhaps it was the murmur of a storm;

and now it was nearer--not a quarter of a mile away;

was it the muffled rasping and grinding of distant

machinery? No, it came still nearer; was it the measured

tramp of a marching troop? But it came nearer still,

and still nearer--and at last it was right in the room: it

was merely a mouse gnawing the woodwork.  So I had held my

breath all that time for such a trifle.



Well, what was done could not be helped; I would go

to sleep at once and make up the lost time.  That was

a thoughtless thought.  Without intending it--hardly

knowing it--I fell to listening intently to that sound,

and even unconsciously counting the strokes of the mouse's

nutmeg-grater. Presently I was deriving exquisite suffering

from this employment, yet maybe I could have endured

it if the mouse had attended steadily to his work;

but he did not do that; he stopped every now and then,

and I suffered more while waiting and listening for

him to begin again than I did while he was gnawing.

Along at first I was mentally offering a reward

of five--six--seven--ten--dollars for that mouse;

but toward the last I was offering rewards which were

entirely beyond my means.  I close-reefed my ears

--that is to say, I bent the flaps of them down and furled

them into five or six folds, and pressed them against

the hearing-orifice--but it did no good: the faculty

was so sharpened by nervous excitement that it was become

a microphone and could hear through the overlays without trouble.





My anger grew to a frenzy.  I finally did what all persons

before me have done, clear back to Adam,--resolved to

throw something.  I reached down and got my walking-shoes,

then sat up in bed and listened, in order to exactly locate

the noise.  But I couldn't do it; it was as unlocatable

as a cricket's noise; and where one thinks that that is,

is always the very place where it isn't. So I presently

hurled a shoe at random, and with a vicious vigor.

It struck the wall over Harris's head and fell down on him;

I had not imagined I could throw so far.  It woke Harris,

and I was glad of it until I found he was not angry;

then I was sorry.  He soon went to sleep again,

which pleased me; but straightway the mouse began again,

which roused my temper once more.  I did not want to wake

Harris a second time, but the gnawing continued until I

was compelled to throw the other shoe.  This time I broke

a mirror--there were two in the room--I got the largest one,

of course.  Harris woke again, but did not complain,

and I was sorrier than ever.  I resolved that I would

suffer all possible torture before I would disturb him a

third time.



The mouse eventually retired, and by and by I was sinking

to sleep, when a clock began to strike; I counted till

it was done, and was about to drowse again when another

clock began; I counted; then the two great RATHHAUS clock

angels began to send forth soft, rich, melodious blasts

from their long trumpets.  I had never heard anything

that was so lovely, or weird, or mysterious--but when they

got to blowing the quarter-hours, they seemed to me to be

overdoing the thing.  Every time I dropped off for the moment,

a new noise woke me.  Each time I woke I missed my coverlet,

and had to reach down to the floor and get it again.



At last all sleepiness forsook me.  I recognized the fact

that I was hopelessly and permanently wide awake.

Wide awake, and feverish and thirsty.  When I had lain

tossing there as long as I could endure it, it occurred

to me that it would be a good idea to dress and go out in

the great square and take a refreshing wash in the fountain,

and smoke and reflect there until the remnant of the night

was gone.



I believed I could dress in the dark without waking Harris.

I had banished my shoes after the mouse, but my slippers

would do for a summer night.  So I rose softly, and gradually

got on everything--down to one sock.  I couldn't seem

to get on the track of that sock, any way I could fix it.

But I had to have it; so I went down on my hands and knees,

with one slipper on and the other in my hand, and began to

paw gently around and rake the floor, but with no success.

I enlarged my circle, and went on pawing and raking.

With every pressure of my knee, how the floor creaked!

and every time I chanced to rake against any article,

it seemed to give out thirty-five or thirty-six times

more noise than it would have done in the daytime.

In those cases I always stopped and held my breath till I

was sure Harris had not awakened--then I crept along again.

I moved on and on, but I could not find the sock;

I could not seem to find anything but furniture.

I could not remember that there was much furniture

in the room when I went to bed, but the place was alive

with it now --especially chairs--chairs everywhere

--had a couple of families moved in, in the mean time? And

I never could seem to GLANCE on one of those chairs,

but always struck it full and square with my head.

My temper rose, by steady and sure degrees, and as I

pawed on and on, I fell to making vicious comments under

my breath.



Finally, with a venomous access of irritation, I said I

would leave without the sock; so I rose up and made straight

for the door--as I supposed--and suddenly confronted my

dim spectral image in the unbroken mirror.  It startled

the breath out of me, for an instant; it also showed me

that I was lost, and had no sort of idea where I was.

When I realized this, I was so angry that I had to sit

down on the floor and take hold of something to keep

from lifting the roof off with an explosion of opinion.

If there had been only one mirror, it might possibly have

helped to locate me; but there were two, and two were as

bad as a thousand; besides, these were on opposite sides

of the room.  I could see the dim blur of the windows,

but in my turned-around condition they were exactly

where they ought not to be, and so they only confused me

instead of helping me.



I started to get up, and knocked down an umbrella;

it made a noise like a pistol-shot when it struck

that hard, slick, carpetless floor; I grated my teeth

and held my breath--Harris did not stir.  I set the

umbrella slowly and carefully on end against the wall,

but as soon as I took my hand away, its heel slipped

from under it, and down it came again with another bang.

I shrunk together and listened a moment in silent fury

--no harm done, everything quiet.  With the most painstaking

care and nicety, I stood the umbrella up once more,

took my hand away, and down it came again.



I have been strictly reared, but if it had not been

so dark and solemn and awful there in that lonely,

vast room, I do believe I should have said something

then which could not be put into a Sunday-school book

without injuring the sale of it.  If my reasoning powers

had not been already sapped dry by my harassments,

I would have known better than to try to set an umbrella

on end on one of those glassy German floors in the dark;

it can't be done in the daytime without four failures

to one success.  I had one comfort, though--Harris was

yet still and silent--he had not stirred.



The umbrella could not locate me--there were four

standing around the room, and all alike.  I thought I

would feel along the wall and find the door in that way.

I rose up and began this operation, but raked down

a picture.  It was not a large one, but it made noise

enough for a panorama.  Harris gave out no sound, but I

felt that if I experimented any further with the pictures

I should be sure to wake him.  Better give up trying to

get out.  Yes, I would find King Arthur's Round Table once

more--I had already found it several times--and use it

for a base of departure on an exploring tour for my bed;

if I could find my bed I could then find my water pitcher;

I would quench my raging thirst and turn in.  So I started

on my hands and knees, because I could go faster that way,

and with more confidence, too, and not knock down things.

By and by I found the table--with my head--rubbed the

bruise a little, then rose up and started, with hands

abroad and fingers spread, to balance myself.  I found

a chair; then a wall; then another chair; then a sofa;

then an alpenstock, then another sofa; this confounded me,

for I had thought there was only one sofa.  I hunted

up the table again and took a fresh start; found some

more chairs.



It occurred to me, now, as it ought to have done before,

that as the table was round, it was therefore of no

value as a base to aim from; so I moved off once more,

and at random among the wilderness of chairs and sofas

--wandering off into unfamiliar regions, and presently knocked

a candlestick and knocked off a lamp, grabbed at the lamp

and knocked off a water pitcher with a rattling crash,

and thought to myself, "I've found you at last--I

judged I was close upon you." Harris shouted "murder,"

and "thieves," and finished with "I'm absolutely drowned."



The crash had roused the house.  Mr. X pranced in,

in his long night-garment, with a candle, young Z after him

with another candle; a procession swept in at another door,

with candles and lanterns--landlord and two German guests

in their nightgowns and a chambermaid in hers.



I looked around; I was at Harris's bed, a Sabbath-day's

journey from my own.  There was only one sofa; it was against

the wall; there was only one chair where a body could get

at it--I had been revolving around it like a planet,

and colliding with it like a comet half the night.



I explained how I had been employing myself, and why.

Then the landlord's party left, and the rest of us set

about our preparations for breakfast, for the dawn was

ready to break.  I glanced furtively at my pedometer,

and found I had made 47 miles.  But I did not care, for I

had come out for a pedestrian tour anyway.







CHAPTER XIV

[Rafting Down the Neckar]



When the landlord learned that I and my agents were artists,

our party rose perceptibly in his esteem; we rose still

higher when he learned that we were making a pedestrian

tour of Europe.



He told us all about the Heidelberg road, and which

were the best places to avoid and which the best ones

to tarry at; he charged me less than cost for the things

I broke in the night; he put up a fine luncheon for us

and added to it a quantity of great light-green plums,

the pleasantest fruit in Germany; he was so anxious to do us

honor that he would not allow us to walk out of Heilbronn,

but called up Goetz von Berlichingen's horse and cab

and made us ride.



I made a sketch of the turnout.  It is not a Work, it is only

what artists call a "study"--a thing to make a finished

picture from.  This sketch has several blemishes in it;

for instance, the wagon is not traveling as fast as the

horse is.  This is wrong.  Again, the person trying to get

out of the way is too small; he is out of perspective,

as we say.  The two upper lines are not the horse's back,

they are the reigns; there seems to be a wheel missing

--this would be corrected in a finished Work, of course.

This thing flying out behind is not a flag, it is a curtain.

That other thing up there is the sun, but I didn't get

enough distance on it.  I do not remember, now, what that

thing is that is in front of the man who is running,

but I think it is a haystack or a woman.  This study

was exhibited in the Paris Salon of 1879, but did not

take any medal; they do not give medals for studies.

[Figure 3]



We discharged the carriage at the bridge.  The river was

full of logs--long, slender, barkless pine logs--and we

leaned on the rails of the bridge, and watched the men put

them together into rafts.  These rafts were of a shape

and construction to suit the crookedness and extreme

narrowness of the Neckar.  They were from fifty to one

hundred yards long, and they gradually tapered from a

nine-log breadth at their sterns, to a three-log breadth

at their bow-ends. The main part of the steering is done

at the bow, with a pole; the three-log breadth there

furnishes room for only the steersman, for these little logs

are not larger around than an average young lady's waist.

The connections of the several sections of the raft are

slack and pliant, so that the raft may be readily bent

into any sort of curve required by the shape of the river.



The Neckar is in many places so narrow that a person

can throw a dog across it, if he has one; when it is

also sharply curved in such places, the raftsman has

to do some pretty nice snug piloting to make the turns.

The river is not always allowed to spread over its whole

bed--which is as much as thirty, and sometimes forty yards

wide--but is split into three equal bodies of water,

by stone dikes which throw the main volume, depth, and current

into the central one.  In low water these neat narrow-edged

dikes project four or five inches above the surface,

like the comb of a submerged roof, but in high water

they are overflowed.  A hatful of rain makes high water

in the Neckar, and a basketful produces an overflow.



There are dikes abreast the Schloss Hotel, and the current

is violently swift at that point.  I used to sit for hours

in my glass cage, watching the long, narrow rafts slip

along through the central channel, grazing the right-bank

dike and aiming carefully for the middle arch of the stone

bridge below; I watched them in this way, and lost all this

time hoping to see one of them hit the bridge-pier and wreck

itself sometime or other, but was always disappointed.

One was smashed there one morning, but I had just stepped

into my room a moment to light a pipe, so I lost it.



While I was looking down upon the rafts that morning

in Heilbronn, the daredevil spirit of adventure came

suddenly upon me, and I said to my comrades:



"_I_ am going to Heidelberg on a raft.  Will you venture

with me?"



Their faces paled a little, but they assented with as

good a grace as they could.  Harris wanted to cable his

mother--thought it his duty to do that, as he was all

she had in this world--so, while he attended to this,

I went down to the longest and finest raft and hailed

the captain with a hearty "Ahoy, shipmate!" which put us

upon pleasant terms at once, and we entered upon business.

I said we were on a pedestrian tour to Heidelberg,

and would like to take passage with him.  I said this

partly through young Z, who spoke German very well,

and partly through Mr. X, who spoke it peculiarly.  I can

UNDERSTAND German as well as the maniac that invented it,

but I TALK it best through an interpreter.



The captain hitched up his trousers, then shifted

his quid thoughtfully.  Presently he said just what I

was expecting he would say--that he had no license

to carry passengers, and therefore was afraid the law

would be after him in case the matter got noised about

or any accident happened.  So I CHARTERED the raft

and the crew and took all the responsibilities on myself.



With a rattling song the starboard watch bent to their

work and hove the cable short, then got the anchor home,

and our bark moved off with a stately stride, and soon

was bowling along at about two knots an hour.



Our party were grouped amidships.  At first the talk was

a little gloomy, and ran mainly upon the shortness of life,

the uncertainty of it, the perils which beset it, and the

need and wisdom of being always prepared for the worst;

this shaded off into low-voiced references to the dangers

of the deep, and kindred matters; but as the gray east

began to redden and the mysterious solemnity and silence

of the dawn to give place to the joy-songs of the birds,

the talk took a cheerier tone, and our spirits began to

rise steadily.



Germany, in the summer, is the perfection of the beautiful,

but nobody has understood, and realized, and enjoyed

the utmost possibilities of this soft and peaceful

beauty unless he has voyaged down the Neckar on a raft.

The motion of a raft is the needful motion; it is gentle,

and gliding, and smooth, and noiseless; it calms down

all feverish activities, it soothes to sleep all nervous

hurry and impatience; under its restful influence all the

troubles and vexations and sorrows that harass the mind

vanish away, and existence becomes a dream, a charm,

a deep and tranquil ecstasy.  How it contrasts with hot

and perspiring pedestrianism, and dusty and deafening

railroad rush, and tedious jolting behind tired horses

over blinding white roads!



We went slipping silently along, between the green and

fragrant banks, with a sense of pleasure and contentment

that grew, and grew, all the time.  Sometimes the banks

were overhung with thick masses of willows that wholly

hid the ground behind; sometimes we had noble hills on

one hand, clothed densely with foliage to their tops,

and on the other hand open levels blazing with poppies,

or clothed in the rich blue of the corn-flower;

sometimes we drifted in the shadow of forests, and sometimes

along the margin of long stretches of velvety grass,

fresh and green and bright, a tireless charm to the eye.

And the birds!--they were everywhere; they swept back

and forth across the river constantly, and their jubilant

music was never stilled.



It was a deep and satisfying pleasure to see the sun

create the new morning, and gradually, patiently,

lovingly, clothe it on with splendor after splendor,

and glory after glory, till the miracle was complete.

How different is this marvel observed from a raft,

from what it is when one observes it through the dingy

windows of a railway-station in some wretched village

while he munches a petrified sandwich and waits for the train.







CHAPTER XV

Down the River

[Charming Waterside Pictures]



Men and women and cattle were at work in the dewy fields

by this time.  The people often stepped aboard the raft,

as we glided along the grassy shores, and gossiped with us

and with the crew for a hundred yards or so, then stepped

ashore again, refreshed by the ride.



Only the men did this; the women were too busy.

The women do all kinds of work on the continent.  They dig,

they hoe, they reap, they sow, they bear monstrous burdens

on their backs, they shove similar ones long distances

on wheelbarrows, they drag the cart when there is no dog

or lean cow to drag it--and when there is, they assist

the dog or cow.  Age is no matter--the older the woman

the stronger she is, apparently.  On the farm a woman's

duties are not defined--she does a little of everything;

but in the towns it is different, there she only does

certain things, the men do the rest.  For instance,

a hotel chambermaid has nothing to do but make beds and

fires in fifty or sixty rooms, bring towels and candles,

and fetch several tons of water up several flights of stairs,

a hundred pounds at a time, in prodigious metal pitchers.

She does not have to work more than eighteen or twenty hours

a day, and she can always get down on her knees and scrub

the floors of halls and closets when she is tired and needs

a rest.



As the morning advanced and the weather grew hot, we took

off our outside clothing and sat in a row along the edge

of the raft and enjoyed the scenery, with our sun-umbrellas

over our heads and our legs dangling in the water.

Every now and then we plunged in and had a swim.

Every projecting grassy cape had its joyous group

of naked children, the boys to themselves and the girls

to themselves, the latter usually in care of some motherly

dame who sat in the shade of a tree with her knitting.

The little boys swam out to us, sometimes, but the little

maids stood knee-deep in the water and stopped their splashing

and frolicking to inspect the raft with their innocent

eyes as it drifted by.  Once we turned a corner suddenly

and surprised a slender girl of twelve years or upward,

just stepping into the water.  She had not time to run,

but she did what answered just as well; she promptly

drew a lithe young willow bough athwart her white body

with one hand, and then contemplated us with a simple and

untroubled interest.  Thus she stood while we glided by.

She was a pretty creature, and she and her willow bough

made a very pretty picture, and one which could not

offend the modesty of the most fastidious spectator.

Her white skin had a low bank of fresh green willows for

background and effective contrast--for she stood against

them--and above and out of them projected the eager faces

and white shoulders of two smaller girls.



Toward noon we heard the inspiring cry:



"Sail ho!"



"Where away?" shouted the captain.



"Three points off the weather bow!"



We ran forward to see the vessel.  It proved to be

a steamboat--for they had begun to run a steamer up

the Neckar, for the first time in May.  She was a tug,

and one of a very peculiar build and aspect.  I had

often watched her from the hotel, and wondered how she

propelled herself, for apparently she had no propeller

or paddles.  She came churning along, now, making a deal

of noise of one kind or another, and aggravating it every

now and then by blowing a hoarse whistle.  She had nine

keel-boats hitched on behind and following after her

in a long, slender rank.  We met her in a narrow place,

between dikes, and there was hardly room for us both in the

cramped passage.  As she went grinding and groaning by,

we perceived the secret of her moving impulse.  She did

not drive herself up the river with paddles or propeller,

she pulled herself by hauling on a great chain.

This chain is laid in the bed of the river and is only

fastened at the two ends.  It is seventy miles long.

It comes in over the boat's bow, passes around a drum,

and is payed out astern.  She pulls on that chain,

and so drags herself up the river or down it.  She has

neither bow or stern, strictly speaking, for she has a

long-bladed rudder on each end and she never turns around.

She uses both rudders all the time, and they are powerful

enough to enable her to turn to the right or the left

and steer around curves, in spite of the strong resistance

of the chain.  I would not have believed that that impossible

thing could be done; but I saw it done, and therefore I

know that there is one impossible thing which CAN be done.

What miracle will man attempt next?



We met many big keel-boats on their way up, using sails,

mule power, and profanity--a tedious and laborious business.

A wire rope led from the foretopmast to the file of mules

on the tow-path a hundred yards ahead, and by dint

of much banging and swearing and urging, the detachment

of drivers managed to get a speed of two or three miles

an hour out of the mules against the stiff current.

The Neckar has always been used as a canal, and thus

has given employment to a great many men and animals;

but now that this steamboat is able, with a small crew

and a bushel or so of coal, to take nine keel-boats farther

up the river in one hour than thirty men and thirty mules

can do it in two, it is believed that the old-fashioned

towing industry is on its death-bed. A second steamboat

began work in the Neckar three months after the first one

was put in service.  [Figure 4]



At noon we stepped ashore and bought some bottled beer

and got some chickens cooked, while the raft waited;

then we immediately put to sea again, and had our

dinner while the beer was cold and the chickens hot.

There is no pleasanter place for such a meal than a raft

that is gliding down the winding Neckar past green meadows

and wooded hills, and slumbering villages, and craggy

heights graced with crumbling towers and battlements.



In one place we saw a nicely dressed German gentleman

without any spectacles.  Before I could come to anchor

he had got underway.  It was a great pity.  I so wanted

to make a sketch of him.  The captain comforted me

for my loss, however, by saying that the man was without

any doubt a fraud who had spectacles, but kept them

in his pocket in order to make himself conspicuous.



Below Hassmersheim we passed Hornberg, Goetz von Berlichingen's

old castle.  It stands on a bold elevation two hundred feet

above the surface of the river; it has high vine-clad walls

enclosing trees, and a peaked tower about seventy-five

feet high.  The steep hillside, from the castle clear

down to the water's edge, is terraced, and clothed thick

with grape vines.  This is like farming a mansard roof.

All the steeps along that part of the river which furnish

the proper exposure, are given up to the grape.  That region

is a great producer of Rhine wines.  The Germans are

exceedingly fond of Rhine wines; they are put up in tall,

slender bottles, and are considered a pleasant beverage.

One tells them from vinegar by the label.



The Hornberg hill is to be tunneled, and the new railway

will pass under the castle.



THE CAVE OF THE SPECTER



Two miles below Hornberg castle is a cave in a low cliff,

which the captain of the raft said had once been occupied

by a beautiful heiress of Hornberg--the Lady Gertrude

--in the old times.  It was seven hundred years ago.

She had a number of rich and noble lovers and one poor

and obscure one, Sir Wendel Lobenfeld.  With the native

chuckleheadedness of the heroine of romance, she preferred

the poor and obscure lover.  With the native sound judgment

of the father of a heroine of romance, the von Berlichingen

of that day shut his daughter up in his donjon keep,

or his oubliette, or his culverin, or some such place,

and resolved that she should stay there until she selected

a husband from among her rich and noble lovers.  The latter

visited her and persecuted her with their supplications,

but without effect, for her heart was true to her poor

despised Crusader, who was fighting in the Holy Land.

Finally, she resolved that she would endure the attentions

of the rich lovers no longer; so one stormy night she escaped

and went down the river and hid herself in the cave on

the other side.  Her father ransacked the country for her,

but found not a trace of her.  As the days went by,

and still no tidings of her came, his conscience began

to torture him, and he caused proclamation to be made

that if she were yet living and would return, he would

oppose her no longer, she might marry whom she would.

The months dragged on, all hope forsook the old man,

he ceased from his customary pursuits and pleasures,

he devoted himself to pious works, and longed for the

deliverance of death.



Now just at midnight, every night, the lost heiress stood

in the mouth of her cave, arrayed in white robes, and sang

a little love ballad which her Crusader had made for her.

She judged that if he came home alive the superstitious

peasants would tell him about the ghost that sang in the cave,

and that as soon as they described the ballad he would know

that none but he and she knew that song, therefore he would

suspect that she was alive, and would come and find her.

As time went on, the people of the region became sorely

distressed about the Specter of the Haunted Cave.

It was said that ill luck of one kind or another always

overtook any one who had the misfortune to hear that song.

Eventually, every calamity that happened thereabouts was

laid at the door of that music.  Consequently, no boatmen

would consent to pass the cave at night; the peasants

shunned the place, even in the daytime.



But the faithful girl sang on, night after night,

month after month, and patiently waited; her reward

must come at last.  Five years dragged by, and still,

every night at midnight, the plaintive tones floated out

over the silent land, while the distant boatmen and peasants

thrust their fingers into their ears and shuddered out a prayer.



And now came the Crusader home, bronzed and battle-scarred,

but bringing a great and splendid fame to lay at the feet

of his bride.  The old lord of Hornberg received him as

his son, and wanted him to stay by him and be the comfort

and blessing of his age; but the tale of that young

girl's devotion to him and its pathetic consequences

made a changed man of the knight.  He could not enjoy

his well-earned rest.  He said his heart was broken,

he would give the remnant of his life to high deeds

in the cause of humanity, and so find a worthy death

and a blessed reunion with the brave true heart whose

love had more honored him than all his victories in war.



When the people heard this resolve of his, they came and told

him there was a pitiless dragon in human disguise in the

Haunted Cave, a dread creature which no knight had yet been

bold enough to face, and begged him to rid the land of its

desolating presence.  He said he would do it.  They told

him about the song, and when he asked what song it was,

they said the memory of it was gone, for nobody had been

hardy enough to listen to it for the past four years and more.



Toward midnight the Crusader came floating down the river

in a boat, with his trusty cross-bow in his hands.

He drifted silently through the dim reflections of the

crags and trees, with his intent eyes fixed upon the low

cliff which he was approaching.  As he drew nearer,

he discerned the black mouth of the cave.  Now--is that

a white figure? Yes.  The plaintive song begins to well

forth and float away over meadow and river--the cross-bow

is slowly raised to position, a steady aim is taken,

the bolt flies straight to the mark--the figure sinks down,

still singing, the knight takes the wool out of his ears,

and recognizes the old ballad--too late! Ah, if he had

only not put the wool in his ears!



The Crusader went away to the wars again, and presently

fell in battle, fighting for the Cross.  Tradition says

that during several centuries the spirit of the unfortunate

girl sang nightly from the cave at midnight, but the music

carried no curse with it; and although many listened

for the mysterious sounds, few were favored, since only

those could hear them who had never failed in a trust.

It is believed that the singing still continues, but it is

known that nobody has heard it during the present century.







CHAPTER XVI

An Ancient Legend of the Rhine

[The Lorelei]



The last legend reminds one of the "Lorelei"--a legend

of the Rhine.  There is a song called "The Lorelei."



Germany is rich in folk-songs, and the words and airs of

several of them are peculiarly beautiful--but "The Lorelei"

is the people's favorite.  I could not endure it at first,

but by and by it began to take hold of me, and now there

is no tune which I like so well.



It is not possible that it is much known in America, else I

should have heard it there.  The fact that I never heard

it there, is evidence that there are others in my country

who have fared likewise; therefore, for the sake of these,

I mean to print the words and music in this chapter.

And I will refresh the reader's memory by printing the legend

of the Lorelei, too.  I have it by me in the LEGENDS OF

THE RHINE, done into English by the wildly gifted Garnham,

Bachelor of Arts.  I print the legend partly to refresh

my own memory, too, for I have never read it before.



THE LEGEND



Lore (two syllables) was a water nymph who used to sit

on a high rock called the Ley or Lei (pronounced like our

word LIE) in the Rhine, and lure boatmen to destruction

in a furious rapid which marred the channel at that spot.

She so bewitched them with her plaintive songs and her

wonderful beauty that they forgot everything else to gaze

up at her, and so they presently drifted among the broken

reefs and were lost.



In those old, old times, the Count Bruno lived in a great

castle near there with his son, the Count Hermann, a youth

of twenty.  Hermann had heard a great deal about the

beautiful Lore, and had finally fallen very deeply in love

with her without having seen her.  So he used to wander

to the neighborhood of the Lei, evenings, with his Zither

and "Express his Longing in low Singing," as Garnham says.

On one of these occasions, "suddenly there hovered around

the top of the rock a brightness of unequaled clearness

and color, which, in increasingly smaller circles thickened,

was the enchanting figure of the beautiful Lore.



"An unintentional cry of Joy escaped the Youth, he let

his Zither fall, and with extended arms he called out

the name of the enigmatical Being, who seemed to stoop

lovingly to him and beckon to him in a friendly manner;

indeed, if his ear did not deceive him, she called his

name with unutterable sweet Whispers, proper to love.

Beside himself with delight the youth lost his Senses

and sank senseless to the earth."



After that he was a changed person.  He went dreaming about,

thinking only of his fairy and caring for naught else

in the world.  "The old count saw with affliction this

changement in his son," whose cause he could not divine,

and tried to divert his mind into cheerful channels,

but to no purpose.  Then the old count used authority.

He commanded the youth to betake himself to the camp.

Obedience was promised.  Garnham says:



"It was on the evening before his departure, as he

wished still once to visit the Lei and offer to the

Nymph of the Rhine his Sighs, the tones of his Zither,

and his Songs.  He went, in his boat, this time accompanied

by a faithful squire, down the stream.  The moon shed

her silvery light over the whole country; the steep

bank mountains appeared in the most fantastical shapes,

and the high oaks on either side bowed their Branches

on Hermann's passing.  As soon as he approached the Lei,

and was aware of the surf-waves, his attendant was seized

with an inexpressible Anxiety and he begged permission

to land; but the Knight swept the strings of his Guitar

and sang:



"Once I saw thee in dark night, In supernatural Beauty bright;

Of Light-rays, was the Figure wove, To share its light,

locked-hair strove.



"Thy Garment color wave-dove By thy hand the sign of love,

Thy eyes sweet enchantment, Raying to me, oh! enchantment.



"O, wert thou but my sweetheart, How willingly thy love

to part! With delight I should be bound To thy rocky

house in deep ground."



That Hermann should have gone to that place at all,

was not wise; that he should have gone with such a song

as that in his mouth was a most serious mistake.  The Lorelei

did not "call his name in unutterable sweet Whispers"

this time.  No, that song naturally worked an instant

and thorough "changement" in her; and not only that,

but it stirred the bowels of the whole afflicted region

around about there--for--



"Scarcely had these tones sounded, everywhere there

began tumult and sound, as if voices above and below

the water.  On the Lei rose flames, the Fairy stood above,

at that time, and beckoned with her right hand clearly

and urgently to the infatuated Knight, while with a staff

in her left hand she called the waves to her service.

They began to mount heavenward; the boat was upset,

mocking every exertion; the waves rose to the gunwale,

and splitting on the hard stones, the Boat broke into Pieces.

The youth sank into the depths, but the squire was thrown on

shore by a powerful wave."



The bitterest things have been said about the Lorelei

during many centuries, but surely her conduct upon this

occasion entitles her to our respect.  One feels drawn

tenderly toward her and is moved to forget her many crimes

and remember only the good deed that crowned and closed

her career.



"The Fairy was never more seen; but her enchanting tones have

often been heard.  In the beautiful, refreshing, still nights

of spring, when the moon pours her silver light over the Country,

the listening shipper hears from the rushing of the waves,

the echoing Clang of a wonderfully charming voice,

which sings a song from the crystal castle, and with sorrow

and fear he thinks on the young Count Hermann, seduced by the

Nymph."



Here is the music, and the German words by Heinrich Heine.

This song has been a favorite in Germany for forty years,

and will remain a favorite always, maybe.  [Figure 5]



I have a prejudice against people who print things

in a foreign language and add no translation.

When I am the reader, and the author considers me

able to do the translating myself, he pays me quite

a nice compliment--but if he would do the translating

for me I would try to get along without the compliment.



If I were at home, no doubt I could get a translation of

this poem, but I am abroad and can't; therefore I will make

a translation myself.  It may not be a good one, for poetry

is out of my line, but it will serve my purpose--which is,

to give the unGerman young girl a jingle of words to hang

the tune on until she can get hold of a good version,

made by some one who is a poet and knows how to convey

a poetical thought from one language to another.



THE LORELEI



I cannot divine what it meaneth,

This haunting nameless pain:

A tale of the bygone ages

Keeps brooding through my brain:



The faint air cools in the glooming,

And peaceful flows the Rhine,

The thirsty summits are drinking

The sunset's flooding wine;



The loveliest maiden is sitting

High-throned in yon blue air,

Her golden jewels are shining,

She combs her golden hair;



She combs with a comb that is golden,

And sings a weird refrain

That steeps in a deadly enchantment

The list'ner's ravished brain:



The doomed in his drifting shallop,

Is tranced with the sad sweet tone,

He sees not the yawning breakers,

He sees but the maid alone:



The pitiless billows engulf him!--

So perish sailor and bark;

And this, with her baleful singing,

Is the Lorelei's gruesome work.



I have a translation by Garnham, Bachelor of Arts,

in the LEGENDS OF THE RHINE, but it would not answer

the purpose I mentioned above, because the measure is too

nobly irregular; it don't fit the tune snugly enough;

in places it hangs over at the ends too far, and in other

places one runs out of words before he gets to the end

of a bar.  Still, Garnham's translation has high merits,

and I am not dreaming of leaving it out of my book.

I believe this poet is wholly unknown in America and England;

I take peculiar pleasure in bringing him forward because I

consider that I discovered him:



THE LORELEI



Translated by L. W. Garnham, B.A.



I do not know what it signifies.

That I am so sorrowful?

A fable of old Times so terrifies,

Leaves my heart so thoughtful.



The air is cool and it darkens,

And calmly flows the Rhine;

The summit of the mountain hearkens

In evening sunshine line.



The most beautiful Maiden entrances

Above wonderfully there,

Her beautiful golden attire glances,

She combs her golden hair.



With golden comb so lustrous,

And thereby a song sings,

It has a tone so wondrous,

That powerful melody rings.



The shipper in the little ship

It effects with woe sad might;

He does not see the rocky slip,

He only regards dreaded height.



I believe the turbulent waves

Swallow the last shipper and boat;

She with her singing craves

All to visit her magic moat.



No translation could be closer.  He has got in all

the facts; and in their regular order, too.  There is not

a statistic wanting.  It is as succinct as an invoice.

That is what a translation ought to be; it should exactly

reflect the thought of the original.  You can't SING "Above

wonderfully there," because it simply won't go to the tune,

without damaging the singer; but it is a most clingingly exact

translation of DORT OBEN WUNDERBAR--fits it like a blister.

Mr. Garnham's reproduction has other merits--a hundred

of them--but it is not necessary to point them out.

They will be detected.



No one with a specialty can hope to have a monopoly of it.

Even Garnham has a rival.  Mr. X had a small pamphlet

with him which he had bought while on a visit to Munich.

It was entitled A CATALOGUE OF PICTURES IN THE OLD PINACOTEK,

and was written in a peculiar kind of English.  Here are

a few extracts:



"It is not permitted to make use of the work

in question to a publication of the same contents

as well as to the pirated edition of it."



"An evening landscape.  In the foreground near a pond

and a group of white beeches is leading a footpath

animated by travelers."



"A learned man in a cynical and torn dress holding an open

book in his hand."



"St. Bartholomew and the Executioner with the knife

to fulfil the martyr."



"Portrait of a young man.  A long while this picture

was thought to be Bindi Altoviti's portrait; now somebody

will again have it to be the self-portrait of Raphael."



"Susan bathing, surprised by the two old man.

In the background the lapidation of the condemned."



("Lapidation" is good; it is much more elegant than

"stoning.")



"St. Rochus sitting in a landscape with an angel who looks

at his plague-sore, whilst the dog the bread in his mouth

attents him."



"Spring. The Goddess Flora, sitting.  Behind her a fertile

valley perfused by a river."



"A beautiful bouquet animated by May-bugs, etc."



"A warrior in armor with a gypseous pipe in his hand leans

against a table and blows the smoke far away of himself."



"A Dutch landscape along a navigable river which perfuses

it till to the background."



"Some peasants singing in a cottage.  A woman lets drink

a child out of a cup."



"St. John's head as a boy--painted in fresco on a brick."

(Meaning a tile.)



"A young man of the Riccio family, his hair cut off

right at the end, dressed in black with the same cap.

Attributed to Raphael, but the signation is false."



"The Virgin holding the Infant.  It is very painted

in the manner of Sassoferrato."



"A Larder with greens and dead game animated by a cook-maid

and two kitchen-boys."



However, the English of this catalogue is at least

as happy as that which distinguishes an inscription

upon a certain picture in Rome--to wit:



"Revelations-View. St. John in Patterson's Island."



But meanwhile the raft is moving on.







CHAPTER XVII

[Why Germans Wear Spectacles]



A mile or two above Eberbach we saw a peculiar ruin projecting

above the foliage which clothed the peak of a high and

very steep hill.  This ruin consisted of merely a couple

of crumbling masses of masonry which bore a rude resemblance

to human faces; they leaned forward and touched foreheads,

and had the look of being absorbed in conversation.  This ruin

had nothing very imposing or picturesque about it, and there

was no great deal of it, yet it was called the "Spectacular

Ruin."



LEGEND OF THE "SPECTACULAR RUIN"



The captain of the raft, who was as full of history as he

could stick, said that in the Middle Ages a most prodigious

fire-breathing dragon used to live in that region,

and made more trouble than a tax-collector. He was as long

as a railway-train, and had the customary impenetrable

green scales all over him.  His breath bred pestilence

and conflagration, and his appetite bred famine.  He ate

men and cattle impartially, and was exceedingly unpopular.

The German emperor of that day made the usual offer:

he would grant to the destroyer of the dragon, any one

solitary thing he might ask for; for he had a surplusage

of daughters, and it was customary for dragon-killers

to take a daughter for pay.



So the most renowned knights came from the four corners

of the earth and retired down the dragon's throat one after

the other.  A panic arose and spread.  Heroes grew cautious.

The procession ceased.  The dragon became more destructive

than ever.  The people lost all hope of succor, and fled

to the mountains for refuge.



At last Sir Wissenschaft, a poor and obscure knight,

out of a far country, arrived to do battle with the monster.

A pitiable object he was, with his armor hanging in rags

about him, and his strange-shaped knapsack strapped

upon his back.  Everybody turned up their noses at him,

and some openly jeered him.  But he was calm.  He simply

inquired if the emperor's offer was still in force.

The emperor said it was--but charitably advised him to go

and hunt hares and not endanger so precious a life as his

in an attempt which had brought death to so many of the

world's most illustrious heroes.



But this tramp only asked--"Were any of these heroes

men of science?" This raised a laugh, of course,

for science was despised in those days.  But the tramp

was not in the least ruffled.  He said he might be a

little in advance of his age, but no matter--science

would come to be honored, some time or other.  He said

he would march against the dragon in the morning.

Out of compassion, then, a decent spear was offered him,

but he declined, and said, "spears were useless to men

of science." They allowed him to sup in the servants'

hall, and gave him a bed in the stables.



When he started forth in the morning, thousands were

gathered to see.  The emperor said:



"Do not be rash, take a spear, and leave off your knapsack."



But the tramp said:



"It is not a knapsack," and moved straight on.



The dragon was waiting and ready.  He was breathing forth

vast volumes of sulphurous smoke and lurid blasts of flame.

The ragged knight stole warily to a good position,

then he unslung his cylindrical knapsack--which was simply

the common fire-extinguisher known to modern times

--and the first chance he got he turned on his hose and shot

the dragon square in the center of his cavernous mouth.

Out went the fires in an instant, and the dragon curled up

and died.



This man had brought brains to his aid.  He had reared

dragons from the egg, in his laboratory, he had watched

over them like a mother, and patiently studied them

and experimented upon them while they grew.  Thus he had

found out that fire was the life principle of a dragon;

put out the dragon's fires and it could make steam

no longer, and must die.  He could not put out a fire

with a spear, therefore he invented the extinguisher.

The dragon being dead, the emperor fell on the hero's neck

and said:



"Deliverer, name your request," at the same time beckoning

out behind with his heel for a detachment of his daughters

to form and advance.  But the tramp gave them no observance.

He simply said:



"My request is, that upon me be conferred the monopoly

of the manufacture and sale of spectacles in Germany."



The emperor sprang aside and exclaimed:



"This transcends all the impudence I ever heard! A

modest demand, by my halidome! Why didn't you ask

for the imperial revenues at once, and be done with it?"



But the monarch had given his word, and he kept it.

To everybody's surprise, the unselfish monopolist immediately

reduced the price of spectacles to such a degree that a

great and crushing burden was removed from the nation.

The emperor, to commemorate this generous act, and to

testify his appreciation of it, issued a decree commanding

everybody to buy this benefactor's spectacles and wear them,

whether they needed them or not.



So originated the wide-spread custom of wearing

spectacles in Germany; and as a custom once established

in these old lands is imperishable, this one remains

universal in the empire to this day.  Such is the legend

of the monopolist's once stately and sumptuous castle,

now called the "Spectacular Ruin."



On the right bank, two or three miles below the Spectacular

Ruin, we passed by a noble pile of castellated buildings

overlooking the water from the crest of a lofty elevation.

A stretch of two hundred yards of the high front wall

was heavily draped with ivy, and out of the mass of

buildings within rose three picturesque old towers.

The place was in fine order, and was inhabited by a

family of princely rank.  This castle had its legend,

too, but I should not feel justified in repeating

it because I doubted the truth of some of its minor details.



Along in this region a multitude of Italian laborers

were blasting away the frontage of the hills to make

room for the new railway.  They were fifty or a hundred

feet above the river.  As we turned a sharp corner they

began to wave signals and shout warnings to us to look

out for the explosions.  It was all very well to warn us,

but what could WE do? You can't back a raft upstream,

you can't hurry it downstream, you can't scatter out

to one side when you haven't any room to speak of,

you won't take to the perpendicular cliffs on the other

shore when they appear to be blasting there, too.

Your resources are limited, you see.  There is simply

nothing for it but to watch and pray.



For some hours we had been making three and a half or four

miles an hour and we were still making that.  We had been

dancing right along until those men began to shout;

then for the next ten minutes it seemed to me that I had

never seen a raft go so slowly.  When the first blast went

off we raised our sun-umbrellas and waited for the result.

No harm done; none of the stones fell in the water.

Another blast followed, and another and another.

Some of the rubbish fell in the water just astern

of us.



We ran that whole battery of nine blasts in a row, and it

was certainly one of the most exciting and uncomfortable

weeks I ever spent, either aship or ashore.  Of course

we frequently manned the poles and shoved earnestly

for a second or so, but every time one of those spurts

of dust and debris shot aloft every man dropped his pole

and looked up to get the bearings of his share of it.

It was very busy times along there for a while.

It appeared certain that we must perish, but even that was

not the bitterest thought; no, the abjectly unheroic nature

of the death--that was the sting--that and the bizarre

wording of the resulting obituary: "SHOT WITH A ROCK,

ON A RAFT." There would be no poetry written about it.

None COULD be written about it.  Example:



NOT by war's shock, or war's shaft,--SHOT, with a rock,

on a raft.



No poet who valued his reputation would touch such a

theme as that.  I should be distinguished as the only

"distinguished dead" who went down to the grave unsonneted,

in 1878.



But we escaped, and I have never regretted it.

The last blast was peculiarly strong one, and after

the small rubbish was done raining around us and we

were just going to shake hands over our deliverance,

a later and larger stone came down amongst our little

group of pedestrians and wrecked an umbrella.  It did

no other harm, but we took to the water just the same.



It seems that the heavy work in the quarries and the

new railway gradings is done mainly by Italians.

That was a revelation.  We have the notion in our country

that Italians never do heavy work at all, but confine

themselves to the lighter arts, like organ-grinding,

operatic singing, and assassination.  We have blundered,

that is plain.



All along the river, near every village, we saw little

station-houses for the future railway.  They were

finished and waiting for the rails and business.

They were as trim and snug and pretty as they could be.

They were always of brick or stone; they were of graceful

shape, they had vines and flowers about them already,

and around them the grass was bright and green,

and showed that it was carefully looked after.  They were

a decoration to the beautiful landscape, not an offense.

Wherever one saw a pile of gravel or a pile of broken stone,

it was always heaped as trimly and exactly as a new grave

or a stack of cannon-balls; nothing about those stations

or along the railroad or the wagon-road was allowed

to look shabby or be unornamental.  The keeping a country

in such beautiful order as Germany exhibits, has a wise

practical side to it, too, for it keeps thousands of people

in work and bread who would otherwise be idle and mischievous.



As the night shut down, the captain wanted to tie up,

but I thought maybe we might make Hirschhorn, so we went on.

Presently the sky became overcast, and the captain came

aft looking uneasy.  He cast his eye aloft, then shook

his head, and said it was coming on to blow.  My party

wanted to land at once--therefore I wanted to go on.

The captain said we ought to shorten sail anyway,

out of common prudence.  Consequently, the larboard watch

was ordered to lay in his pole.  It grew quite dark,

now, and the wind began to rise.  It wailed through

the swaying branches of the trees, and swept our decks

in fitful gusts.  Things were taking on an ugly look.

The captain shouted to the steersman on the forward

log:



"How's she landing?"



The answer came faint and hoarse from far forward:



"Nor'-east-and-by-nor'--east-by-east, half-east, sir."



"Let her go off a point!"



"Aye-aye, sir!"



"What water have you got?"



"Shoal, sir.  Two foot large, on the stabboard,

two and a half scant on the labboard!"



"Let her go off another point!"



"Aye-aye, sir!"



"Forward, men, all of you! Lively, now! Stand by to crowd

her round the weather corner!"



"Aye-aye, sir!"



Then followed a wild running and trampling and hoarse shouting,

but the forms of the men were lost in the darkness and

the sounds were distorted and confused by the roaring

of the wind through the shingle-bundles. By this time

the sea was running inches high, and threatening every

moment to engulf the frail bark.  Now came the mate,

hurrying aft, and said, close to the captain's ear,

in a low, agitated voice:



"Prepare for the worst, sir--we have sprung a leak!"



"Heavens! where?"



"Right aft the second row of logs."



"Nothing but a miracle can save us! Don't let the men know,

or there will be a panic and mutiny! Lay her in shore

and stand by to jump with the stern-line the moment

she touches.  Gentlemen, I must look to you to second

my endeavors in this hour of peril.  You have hats--go

forward and bail for your lives!"



Down swept another mighty blast of wind, clothed in

spray and thick darkness.  At such a moment as this,

came from away forward that most appalling of all cries

that are ever heard at sea:



"MAN OVERBOARD!"



The captain shouted:



"Hard a-port! Never mind the man! Let him climb aboard

or wade ashore!"



Another cry came down the wind:



"Breakers ahead!"



"Where away?"



"Not a log's length off her port fore-foot!"



We had groped our slippery way forward, and were now

bailing with the frenzy of despair, when we heard

the mate's terrified cry, from far aft:



"Stop that dashed bailing, or we shall be aground!"



But this was immediately followed by the glad shout:



"Land aboard the starboard transom!"



"Saved!" cried the captain.  "Jump ashore and take a turn

around a tree and pass the bight aboard!"



The next moment we were all on shore weeping and embracing

for joy, while the rain poured down in torrents.

The captain said he had been a mariner for forty years

on the Neckar, and in that time had seen storms to make

a man's cheek blanch and his pulses stop, but he had never,

never seen a storm that even approached this one.

How familiar that sounded! For I have been at sea a good

deal and have heard that remark from captains with a

frequency accordingly.



We framed in our minds the usual resolution of thanks

and admiration and gratitude, and took the first

opportunity to vote it, and put it in writing and

present it to the captain, with the customary speech.

We tramped through the darkness and the drenching summer

rain full three miles, and reached "The Naturalist Tavern"

in the village of Hirschhorn just an hour before midnight,

almost exhausted from hardship, fatigue, and terror.

I can never forget that night.



The landlord was rich, and therefore could afford to be

crusty and disobliging; he did not at all like being

turned out of his warm bed to open his house for us.

But no matter, his household got up and cooked a quick

supper for us, and we brewed a hot punch for ourselves,

to keep off consumption.  After supper and punch we

had an hour's soothing smoke while we fought the naval

battle over again and voted the resolutions; then we

retired to exceedingly neat and pretty chambers upstairs

that had clean, comfortable beds in them with heirloom

pillowcases most elaborately and tastefully embroidered

by hand.



Such rooms and beds and embroidered linen are as frequent

in German village inns as they are rare in ours.

Our villages are superior to German villages in

more merits, excellences, conveniences, and privileges

than I can enumerate, but the hotels do not belong in the list.



"The Naturalist Tavern" was not a meaningless name; for all

the halls and all the rooms were lined with large glass

cases which were filled with all sorts of birds and animals,

glass-eyed, ably stuffed, and set up in the most natural

eloquent and dramatic attitudes.  The moment we were abed,

the rain cleared away and the moon came out.  I dozed off

to sleep while contemplating a great white stuffed owl

which was looking intently down on me from a high perch

with the air of a person who thought he had met me before,

but could not make out for certain.



But young Z did not get off so easily.  He said that as he was

sinking deliciously to sleep, the moon lifted away the shadows

and developed a huge cat, on a bracket, dead and stuffed,

but crouching, with every muscle tense, for a spring,

and with its glittering glass eyes aimed straight at him.

It made Z uncomfortable.  He tried closing his own eyes,

but that did not answer, for a natural instinct kept

making him open them again to see if the cat was still

getting ready to launch at him--which she always was.

He tried turning his back, but that was a failure;

he knew the sinister eyes were on him still.  So at

last he had to get up, after an hour or two of worry

and experiment, and set the cat out in the hall.  So he won,

that time.







CHAPTER XVIII

[The Kindly Courtesy of Germans]



In the morning we took breakfast in the garden,

under the trees, in the delightful German summer fashion.

The air was filled with the fragrance of flowers

and wild animals; the living portion of the menagerie

of the "Naturalist Tavern" was all about us.  There were

great cages populous with fluttering and chattering

foreign birds, and other great cages and greater wire pens,

populous with quadrupeds, both native and foreign.

There were some free creatures, too, and quite sociable

ones they were.  White rabbits went loping about the place,

and occasionally came and sniffed at our shoes and shins;

a fawn, with a red ribbon on its neck, walked up and

examined us fearlessly; rare breeds of chickens and

doves begged for crumbs, and a poor old tailless raven

hopped about with a humble, shamefaced mein which said,

"Please do not notice my exposure--think how you would

feel in my circumstances, and be charitable." If he

was observed too much, he would retire behind something

and stay there until he judged the party's interest had

found another object.  I never have seen another dumb

creature that was so morbidly sensitive.  Bayard Taylor,

who could interpret the dim reasonings of animals,

and understood their moral natures better than most men,

would have found some way to make this poor old chap forget

his troubles for a while, but we have not his kindly art,

and so had to leave the raven to his griefs.



After breakfast we climbed the hill and visited the ancient

castle of Hirschhorn, and the ruined church near it.

There were some curious old bas-reliefs leaning against

the inner walls of the church--sculptured lords of

Hirschhorn in complete armor, and ladies of Hirschhorn

in the picturesque court costumes of the Middle Ages.

These things are suffering damage and passing to decay,

for the last Hirschhorn has been dead two hundred years,

and there is nobody now who cares to preserve the family relics.

In the chancel was a twisted stone column, and the captain

told us a legend about it, of course, for in the matter

of legends he could not seem to restrain himself; but I

do not repeat his tale because there was nothing plausible

about it except that the Hero wrenched this column into its

present screw-shape with his hands --just one single wrench.

All the rest of the legend was doubtful.



But Hirschhorn is best seen from a distance, down the river.

Then the clustered brown towers perched on the green hilltop,

and the old battlemented stone wall, stretching up and over

the grassy ridge and disappearing in the leafy sea beyond,

make a picture whose grace and beauty entirely satisfy

the eye.



We descended from the church by steep stone stairways

which curved this way and that down narrow alleys

between the packed and dirty tenements of the village.

It was a quarter well stocked with deformed, leering,

unkempt and uncombed idiots, who held out hands or caps

and begged piteously.  The people of the quarter were not

all idiots, of course, but all that begged seemed to be,

and were said to be.



I was thinking of going by skiff to the next town,

Necharsteinach; so I ran to the riverside in advance of

the party and asked a man there if he had a boat to hire.

I suppose I must have spoken High German--Court German--I

intended it for that, anyway--so he did not understand me.

I turned and twisted my question around and about,

trying to strike that man's average, but failed.

He could not make out what I wanted.  Now Mr. X arrived,

faced this same man, looked him in the eye, and emptied

this sentence on him, in the most glib and confident way:

"Can man boat get here?"



The mariner promptly understood and promptly answered.

I can comprehend why he was able to understand that

particular sentence, because by mere accident all the

words in it except "get" have the same sound and the same

meaning in German that they have in English; but how he

managed to understand Mr. X's next remark puzzled me.

I will insert it, presently.  X turned away a moment,

and I asked the mariner if he could not find a board,

and so construct an additional seat.  I spoke in the

purest German, but I might as well have spoken in the

purest Choctaw for all the good it did.  The man tried

his best to understand me; he tried, and kept on trying,

harder and harder, until I saw it was really of no use,

and said:



"There, don't strain yourself--it is of no consequence."



Then X turned to him and crisply said:



"MACHEN SIE a flat board."



I wish my epitaph may tell the truth about me if the man

did not answer up at once, and say he would go and borrow

a board as soon as he had lit the pipe which he was filling.



We changed our mind about taking a boat, so we did not have

to go.  I have given Mr. X's two remarks just as he made them.

Four of the five words in the first one were English,

and that they were also German was only accidental,

not intentional; three out of the five words in the second

remark were English, and English only, and the two German

ones did not mean anything in particular, in such a connection.



X always spoke English to Germans, but his plan was

to turn the sentence wrong end first and upside down,

according to German construction, and sprinkle in a German

word without any essential meaning to it, here and there,

by way of flavor.  Yet he always made himself understood.

He could make those dialect-speaking raftsmen understand

him, sometimes, when even young Z had failed with them;

and young Z was a pretty good German scholar.  For one thing,

X always spoke with such confidence--perhaps that helped.

And possibly the raftsmen's dialect was what is called

PLATT-DEUTSCH, and so they found his English more familiar

to their ears than another man's German.  Quite indifferent

students of German can read Fritz Reuter's charming

platt-Deutch tales with some little facility because many

of the words are English.  I suppose this is the tongue

which our Saxon ancestors carried to England with them.

By and by I will inquire of some other philologist.



However, in the mean time it had transpired that the men

employed to calk the raft had found that the leak was not

a leak at all, but only a crack between the logs--a crack

that belonged there, and was not dangerous, but had been

magnified into a leak by the disordered imagination of

the mate.  Therefore we went aboard again with a good degree

of confidence, and presently got to sea without accident.

As we swam smoothly along between the enchanting shores,

we fell to swapping notes about manners and customs

in Germany and elsewhere.



As I write, now, many months later, I perceive that each of us,

by observing and noting and inquiring, diligently and day

by day, had managed to lay in a most varied and opulent

stock of misinformation.  But this is not surprising;

it is very difficult to get accurate details in any country.

For example, I had the idea once, in Heidelberg,

to find out all about those five student-corps. I started

with the White Cap corps.  I began to inquire of this

and that and the other citizen, and here is what I found

out:



1.  It is called the Prussian Corps, because none

but Prussians are admitted to it.



2.  It is called the Prussian Corps for no particular reason.

It has simply pleased each corps to name itself after

some German state.



3.  It is not named the Prussian Corps at all, but only

the White Cap Corps.



4.  Any student can belong to it who is a German by birth.



5.  Any student can belong to it who is European by birth.



6.  Any European-born student can belong to it, except he

be a Frenchman.



7.  Any student can belong to it, no matter where he

was born.



8.  No student can belong to it who is not of noble blood.



9.  No student can belong to it who cannot show three full

generations of noble descent.



10.  Nobility is not a necessary qualification.



11.  No moneyless student can belong to it.



12.  Money qualification is nonsense--such a thing has

never been thought of.



I got some of this information from students themselves

--students who did not belong to the corps.



I finally went to headquarters--to the White Caps--where I

would have gone in the first place if I had been acquainted.

But even at headquarters I found difficulties; I perceived

that there were things about the White Cap Corps which

one member knew and another one didn't. It was natural;

for very few members of any organization know ALL that can

be known about it.  I doubt there is a man or a woman

in Heidelberg who would not answer promptly and confidently

three out of every five questions about the White Cap Corps

which a stranger might ask; yet it is a very safe bet

that two of the three answers would be incorrect every time.



There is one German custom which is universal--the bowing

courteously to strangers when sitting down at table or

rising up from it.  This bow startles a stranger out of his

self-possession, the first time it occurs, and he is likely

to fall over a chair or something, in his embarrassment,

but it pleases him, nevertheless.  One soon learns to expect

this bow and be on the lookout and ready to return it;

but to learn to lead off and make the initial bow

one's self is a difficult matter for a diffident man.

One thinks, "If I rise to go, and tender my box,

and these ladies and gentlemen take it into their heads

to ignore the custom of their nation, and not return it,

how shall I feel, in case I survive to feel anything."

Therefore he is afraid to venture.  He sits out the dinner,

and makes the strangers rise first and originate the bowing.

A table d'ho^te dinner is a tedious affair for a man

who seldom touches anything after the three first courses;

therefore I used to do some pretty dreary waiting

because of my fears.  It took me months to assure myself

that those fears were groundless, but I did assure myself

at last by experimenting diligently through my agent.

I made Harris get up and bow and leave; invariably his bow

was returned, then I got up and bowed myself and retired.



Thus my education proceeded easily and comfortably for me,

but not for Harris.  Three courses of a table d'ho^te

dinner were enough for me, but Harris preferred thirteen.



Even after I had acquired full confidence, and no longer needed

the agent's help, I sometimes encountered difficulties.

Once at Baden-Baden I nearly lost a train because I could

not be sure that three young ladies opposite me at table

were Germans, since I had not heard them speak; they might

be American, they might be English, it was not safe to venture

a bow; but just as I had got that far with my thought,

one of them began a German remark, to my great relief

and gratitude; and before she got out her third word,

our bows had been delivered and graciously returned,

and we were off.



There is a friendly something about the German character

which is very winning.  When Harris and I were making

a pedestrian tour through the Black Forest, we stopped at

a little country inn for dinner one day; two young ladies

and a young gentleman entered and sat down opposite us.

They were pedestrians, too.  Our knapsacks were strapped

upon our backs, but they had a sturdy youth along to carry

theirs for them.  All parties were hungry, so there was

no talking.  By and by the usual bows were exchanged,

and we separated.



As we sat at a late breakfast in the hotel at Allerheiligen,

next morning, these young people and took places

near us without observing us; but presently they saw

us and at once bowed and smiled; not ceremoniously,

but with the gratified look of people who have found

acquaintances where they were expecting strangers.

Then they spoke of the weather and the roads.  We also

spoke of the weather and the roads.  Next, they said they

had had an enjoyable walk, notwithstanding the weather.

We said that that had been our case, too.  Then they said

they had walked thirty English miles the day before,

and asked how many we had walked.  I could not lie, so I

told Harris to do it.  Harris told them we had made thirty

English miles, too.  That was true; we had "made" them,

though we had had a little assistance here and there.



After breakfast they found us trying to blast some

information out of the dumb hotel clerk about routes,

and observing that we were not succeeding pretty well,

they went and got their maps and things, and pointed

out and explained our course so clearly that even a New

York detective could have followed it.  And when we

started they spoke out a hearty good-by and wished us

a pleasant journey.  Perhaps they were more generous

with us than they might have been with native wayfarers

because we were a forlorn lot and in a strange land;

I don't know; I only know it was lovely to be treated so.



Very well, I took an American young lady to one of the fine

balls in Baden-Baden, one night, and at the entrance-door

upstairs we were halted by an official--something about Miss

Jones's dress was not according to rule; I don't remember

what it was, now; something was wanting--her back hair,

or a shawl, or a fan, or a shovel, or something.

The official was ever so polite, and every so sorry,

but the rule was strict, and he could not let us in.

It was very embarrassing, for many eyes were on us.

But now a richly dressed girl stepped out of the ballroom,

inquired into the trouble, and said she could fix it in

a moment.  She took Miss Jones to the robing-room, and soon

brought her back in regulation trim, and then we entered

the ballroom with this benefactress unchallenged.



Being safe, now, I began to puzzle through my sincere

but ungrammatical thanks, when there was a sudden mutual

recognition --the benefactress and I had met at Allerheiligen.

Two weeks had not altered her good face, and plainly

her heart was in the right place yet, but there was such

a difference between these clothes and the clothes I

had seen her in before, when she was walking thirty miles

a day in the Black Forest, that it was quite natural

that I had failed to recognize her sooner.  I had on MY

other suit, too, but my German would betray me to a person

who had heard it once, anyway.  She brought her brother

and sister, and they made our way smooth for that evening.



Well--months afterward, I was driving through the streets

of Munich in a cab with a German lady, one day, when she

said:



"There, that is Prince Ludwig and his wife, walking along there."



Everybody was bowing to them--cabmen, little children,

and everybody else--and they were returning all the bows

and overlooking nobody, when a young lady met them and made

a deep courtesy.



"That is probably one of the ladies of the court,"

said my German friend.



I said:



"She is an honor to it, then.  I know her.  I don't know

her name, but I know HER.  I have known her at Allerheiligen

and Baden-Baden. She ought to be an Empress, but she

may be only a Duchess; it is the way things go in this way."



If one asks a German a civil question, he will be quite

sure to get a civil answer.  If you stop a German in the

street and ask him to direct you to a certain place,

he shows no sign of feeling offended.  If the place be

difficult to find, ten to one the man will drop his own

matters and go with you and show you.



In London, too, many a time, strangers have walked several

blocks with me to show me my way.



There is something very real about this sort of politeness.

Quite often, in Germany, shopkeepers who could not furnish

me the article I wanted have sent one of their employees

with me to show me a place where it could be had.







CHAPTER XIX

[The Deadly Jest of Dilsberg]



However, I wander from the raft.  We made the port

of Necharsteinach in good season, and went to the hotel

and ordered a trout dinner, the same to be ready

against our return from a two-hour pedestrian excursion

to the village and castle of Dilsberg, a mile distant,

on the other side of the river.  I do not mean that we

proposed to be two hours making two miles--no, we meant

to employ most of the time in inspecting Dilsberg.



For Dilsberg is a quaint place.  It is most quaintly

and picturesquely situated, too.  Imagine the beautiful

river before you; then a few rods of brilliant green sward

on its opposite shore; then a sudden hill--no preparatory

gently rising slopes, but a sort of instantaneous hill

--a hill two hundred and fifty or three hundred feet high,

as round as a bowl, with the same taper upward that an

inverted bowl has, and with about the same relation

of height to diameter that distinguishes a bowl of good

honest depth--a hill which is thickly clothed with

green bushes--a comely, shapely hill, rising abruptly

out of the dead level of the surrounding green plains,

visible from a great distance down the bends of the river,

and with just exactly room on the top of its head

for its steepled and turreted and roof-clustered cap

of architecture, which same is tightly jammed and compacted

within the perfectly round hoop of the ancient village wall.



There is no house outside the wall on the whole hill,

or any vestige of a former house; all the houses are

inside the wall, but there isn't room for another one.

It is really a finished town, and has been finished

a very long time.  There is no space between the wall

and the first circle of buildings; no, the village wall

is itself the rear wall of the first circle of buildings,

and the roofs jut a little over the wall and thus

furnish it with eaves.  The general level of the massed

roofs is gracefully broken and relieved by the dominating

towers of the ruined castle and the tall spires of a

couple of churches; so, from a distance Dilsberg has

rather more the look of a king's crown than a cap.

That lofty green eminence and its quaint coronet form

quite a striking picture, you may be sure, in the flush

of the evening sun.



We crossed over in a boat and began the ascent by a narrow,

steep path which plunged us at once into the leafy deeps

of the bushes.  But they were not cool deeps by any means,

for the sun's rays were weltering hot and there was

little or no breeze to temper them.  As we panted up

the sharp ascent, we met brown, bareheaded and barefooted

boys and girls, occasionally, and sometimes men;

they came upon us without warning, they gave us good day,

flashed out of sight in the bushes, and were gone as

suddenly and mysteriously as they had come.  They were

bound for the other side of the river to work.  This path

had been traveled by many generations of these people.

They have always gone down to the valley to earn their bread,

but they have always climbed their hill again to eat it,

and to sleep in their snug town.



It is said that the Dilsbergers do not emigrate much;

they find that living up there above the world, in their

peaceful nest, is pleasanter than living down in the

troublous world.  The seven hundred inhabitants are all

blood-kin to each other, too; they have always been blood-kin

to each other for fifteen hundred years; they are simply

one large family, and they like the home folks better than

they like strangers, hence they persistently stay at home.

It has been said that for ages Dilsberg has been merely

a thriving and diligent idiot-factory. I saw no idiots there,

but the captain said, "Because of late years the government

has taken to lugging them off to asylums and otherwheres;

and government wants to cripple the factory, too, and is

trying to get these Dilsbergers to marry out of the family,

but they don't like to."



The captain probably imagined all this, as modern science

denies that the intermarrying of relatives deteriorates

the stock.



Arrived within the wall, we found the usual village

sights and life.  We moved along a narrow, crooked lane

which had been paved in the Middle Ages.  A strapping,

ruddy girl was beating flax or some such stuff in a little

bit of a good-box of a barn, and she swung her flail

with a will--if it was a flail; I was not farmer enough

to know what she was at; a frowsy, barelegged girl was

herding half a dozen geese with a stick--driving them

along the lane and keeping them out of the dwellings;

a cooper was at work in a shop which I know he did not make

so large a thing as a hogshead in, for there was not room.

In the front rooms of dwellings girls and women were

cooking or spinning, and ducks and chickens were waddling

in and out, over the threshold, picking up chance crumbs

and holding pleasant converse; a very old and wrinkled man

sat asleep before his door, with his chin upon his breast

and his extinguished pipe in his lap; soiled children

were playing in the dirt everywhere along the lane,

unmindful of the sun.



Except the sleeping old man, everybody was at work,

but the place was very still and peaceful, nevertheless;

so still that the distant cackle of the successful hen smote

upon the ear but little dulled by intervening sounds.

That commonest of village sights was lacking here--the

public pump, with its great stone tank or trough of

limpid water, and its group of gossiping pitcher-bearers;

for there is no well or fountain or spring on this tall hill;

cisterns of rain-water are used.



Our alpenstocks and muslin tails compelled attention,

and as we moved through the village we gathered a considerable

procession of little boys and girls, and so went in some

state to the castle.  It proved to be an extensive pile of

crumbling walls, arches, and towers, massive, properly grouped

for picturesque effect, weedy, grass-grown, and satisfactory.

The children acted as guides; they walked us along the top

of the highest walls, then took us up into a high tower

and showed us a wide and beautiful landscape, made up

of wavy distances of woody hills, and a nearer prospect

of undulating expanses of green lowlands, on the one hand,

and castle-graced crags and ridges on the other,

with the shining curves of the Neckar flowing between.

But the principal show, the chief pride of the children,

was the ancient and empty well in the grass-grown court

of the castle.  Its massive stone curb stands up three

or four feet above-ground, and is whole and uninjured.

The children said that in the Middle Ages this well was

four hundred feet deep, and furnished all the village

with an abundant supply of water, in war and peace.

They said that in the old day its bottom was below the level

of the Neckar, hence the water-supply was inexhaustible.



But there were some who believed it had never been a well

at all, and was never deeper than it is now--eighty feet;

that at that depth a subterranean passage branched from it

and descended gradually to a remote place in the valley,

where it opened into somebody's cellar or other hidden recess,

and that the secret of this locality is now lost.

Those who hold this belief say that herein lies the

explanation that Dilsberg, besieged by Tilly and many

a soldier before him, was never taken: after the longest

and closest sieges the besiegers were astonished to

perceive that the besieged were as fat and hearty as ever,

and were well furnished with munitions of war--therefore

it must be that the Dilsbergers had been bringing these

things in through the subterranean passage all the time.



The children said that there was in truth a subterranean

outlet down there, and they would prove it.  So they set

a great truss of straw on fire and threw it down the well,

while we leaned on the curb and watched the glowing

mass descend.  It struck bottom and gradually burned out.

No smoke came up.  The children clapped their hands and

said:



"You see! Nothing makes so much smoke as burning straw--now

where did the smoke go to, if there is no subterranean outlet?"



So it seemed quite evident that the subterranean outlet

indeed existed.  But the finest thing within the ruin's

limits was a noble linden, which the children said was

four hundred years old, and no doubt it was.  It had

a mighty trunk and a mighty spread of limb and foliage.

The limbs near the ground were nearly the thickness

of a barrel.



That tree had witnessed the assaults of men in mail

--how remote such a time seems, and how ungraspable is the

fact that real men ever did fight in real armor!--and it

had seen the time when these broken arches and crumbling

battlements were a trim and strong and stately fortress,

fluttering its gay banners in the sun, and peopled with vigorous

humanity--how impossibly long ago that seems!--and here

it stands yet, and possibly may still be standing here,

sunning itself and dreaming its historical dreams,

when today shall have been joined to the days called "ancient."



Well, we sat down under the tree to smoke, and the captain

delivered himself of his legend:



THE LEGEND OF DILSBERG CASTLE



It was to this effect.  In the old times there was once

a great company assembled at the castle, and festivity

ran high.  Of course there was a haunted chamber

in the castle, and one day the talk fell upon that.

It was said that whoever slept in it would not wake again

for fifty years.  Now when a young knight named Conrad

von Geisberg heard this, he said that if the castle were

his he would destroy that chamber, so that no foolish

person might have the chance to bring so dreadful

a misfortune upon himself and afflict such as loved

him with the memory of it.  Straightway, the company

privately laid their heads together to contrive some

way to get this superstitious young man to sleep in that chamber.





And they succeeded--in this way.  They persuaded

his betrothed, a lovely mischievous young creature,

niece of the lord of the castle, to help them in their plot.

She presently took him aside and had speech with him.

She used all her persuasions, but could not shake him;

he said his belief was firm, that if he should sleep

there he would wake no more for fifty years, and it made

him shudder to think of it.  Catharina began to weep.

This was a better argument; Conrad could not out against it.

He yielded and said she should have her wish if she would only

smile and be happy again.  She flung her arms about his neck,

and the kisses she gave him showed that her thankfulness

and her pleasure were very real.  Then she flew to tell

the company her success, and the applause she received

made her glad and proud she had undertaken her mission,

since all alone she had accomplished what the multitude had

failed in.



At midnight, that night, after the usual feasting,

Conrad was taken to the haunted chamber and left there.

He fell asleep, by and by.



When he awoke again and looked about him, his heart

stood still with horror! The whole aspect of the chamber

was changed.  The walls were moldy and hung with

ancient cobwebs; the curtains and beddings were rotten;

the furniture was rickety and ready to fall to pieces.

He sprang out of bed, but his quaking knees sunk under

him and he fell to the floor.



"This is the weakness of age," he said.



He rose and sought his clothing.  It was clothing no longer.

The colors were gone, the garments gave way in many places

while he was putting them on.  He fled, shuddering,

into the corridor, and along it to the great hall.  Here he

was met by a middle-aged stranger of a kind countenance,

who stopped and gazed at him with surprise.  Conrad said:



"Good sir, will you send hither the lord Ulrich?"



The stranger looked puzzled a moment, then said:



"The lord Ulrich?"



"Yes--if you will be so good."



The stranger called--"Wilhelm!" A young serving-man came,

and the stranger said to him:



"Is there a lord Ulrich among the guests?"



"I know none of the name, so please your honor."



Conrad said, hesitatingly:



"I did not mean a guest, but the lord of the castle, sir."



The stranger and the servant exchanged wondering glances.

Then the former said:



"I am the lord of the castle."



"Since when, sir?"



"Since the death of my father, the good lord Ulrich

more than forty years ago."



Conrad sank upon a bench and covered his face with his

hands while he rocked his body to and fro and moaned.

The stranger said in a low voice to the servant:



"I fear me this poor old creature is mad.  Call some one."



In a moment several people came, and grouped themselves about,

talking in whispers.  Conrad looked up and scanned

the faces about him wistfully.



Then he shook his head and said, in a grieved voice:



"No, there is none among ye that I know.  I am old and alone

in the world.  They are dead and gone these many years

that cared for me.  But sure, some of these aged ones I see

about me can tell me some little word or two concerning them."



Several bent and tottering men and women came nearer

and answered his questions about each former friend

as he mentioned the names.  This one they said had been

dead ten years, that one twenty, another thirty.

Each succeeding blow struck heavier and heavier.

At last the sufferer said:



"There is one more, but I have not the courage to--O

my lost Catharina!"



One of the old dames said:



"Ah, I knew her well, poor soul.  A misfortune overtook

her lover, and she died of sorrow nearly fifty years ago.

She lieth under the linden tree without the court."



Conrad bowed his head and said:



"Ah, why did I ever wake! And so she died of grief for me,

poor child.  So young, so sweet, so good! She never wittingly

did a hurtful thing in all the little summer of her life.

Her loving debt shall be repaid--for I will die of grief

for her."



His head drooped upon his breast.  In the moment there

was a wild burst of joyous laughter, a pair of round

young arms were flung about Conrad's neck and a sweet

voice cried:



"There, Conrad mine, thy kind words kill me--the farce

shall go no further! Look up, and laugh with us--'twas

all a jest!"



And he did look up, and gazed, in a dazed wonderment

--for the disguises were stripped away, and the aged

men and women were bright and young and gay again.

Catharina's happy tongue ran on:



"'Twas a marvelous jest, and bravely carried out.

They gave you a heavy sleeping-draught before you went

to bed, and in the night they bore you to a ruined chamber

where all had fallen to decay, and placed these rags

of clothing by you.  And when your sleep was spent and you

came forth, two strangers, well instructed in their parts,

were here to meet you; and all we, your friends,

in our disguises, were close at hand, to see and hear,

you may be sure.  Ah, 'twas a gallant jest! Come, now,

and make thee ready for the pleasures of the day.

How real was thy misery for the moment, thou poor lad!

Look up and have thy laugh, now!"



He looked up, searched the merry faces about him

in a dreamy way, then sighed and said:



"I am aweary, good strangers, I pray you lead me to her grave."



All the smile vanished away, every cheek blanched,

Catharina sunk to the ground in a swoon.



All day the people went about the castle with troubled faces,

and communed together in undertones.  A painful hush

pervaded the place which had lately been so full of

cheery life.  Each in his turn tried to arouse Conrad

out of his hallucination and bring him to himself;

but all the answer any got was a meek, bewildered stare,

and then the words:



"Good stranger, I have no friends, all are at rest these

many years; ye speak me fair, ye mean me well, but I know

ye not; I am alone and forlorn in the world--prithee

lead me to her grave."



During two years Conrad spent his days, from the

early morning till the night, under the linden tree,

mourning over the imaginary grave of his Catharina.

Catharina was the only company of the harmless madman.

He was very friendly toward her because, as he said,

in some ways she reminded him of his Catharina whom he had

lost "fifty years ago." He often said:



"She was so gay, so happy-hearted--but you never smile;

and always when you think I am not looking, you cry."



When Conrad died, they buried him under the linden,

according to his directions, so that he might rest

"near his poor Catharina." Then Catharina sat under

the linden alone, every day and all day long, a great

many years, speaking to no one, and never smiling;

and at last her long repentance was rewarded with death,

and she was buried by Conrad's side.



Harris pleased the captain by saying it was good legend;

and pleased him further by adding:



"Now that I have seen this mighty tree, vigorous with

its four hundred years, I feel a desire to believe

the legend for ITS sake; so I will humor the desire,

and consider that the tree really watches over those poor

hearts and feels a sort of human tenderness for them."



We returned to Necharsteinach, plunged our hot heads

into the trough at the town pump, and then went to the

hotel and ate our trout dinner in leisurely comfort,

in the garden, with the beautiful Neckar flowing at our feet,

the quaint Dilsberg looming beyond, and the graceful

towers and battlements of a couple of medieval castles

(called the "Swallow's Nest" [1] and "The Brothers.")

assisting the rugged scenery of a bend of the river

down to our right.  We got to sea in season to make the

eight-mile run to Heidelberg before the night shut down.

We sailed by the hotel in the mellow glow of sunset,

and came slashing down with the mad current into the narrow

passage between the dikes.  I believed I could shoot the

bridge myself, and I went to the forward triplet of logs

and relieved the pilot of his pole and his responsibility.



1.  The seeker after information is referred to Appendix

    E for our captain's legend of the "Swallow's Nest"

    and "The Brothers."



We went tearing along in a most exhilarating way, and I

performed the delicate duties of my office very well indeed

for a first attempt; but perceiving, presently, that I

really was going to shoot the bridge itself instead

of the archway under it, I judiciously stepped ashore.

The next moment I had my long-coveted desire: I saw

a raft wrecked.  It hit the pier in the center and went

all to smash and scatteration like a box of matches

struck by lightning.



I was the only one of our party who saw this grand sight;

the others were attitudinizing, for the benefit of the long

rank of young ladies who were promenading on the bank,

and so they lost it.  But I helped to fish them out of

the river, down below the bridge, and then described it

to them as well as I could.



They were not interested, though.  They said they were

wet and felt ridiculous and did not care anything for

descriptions of scenery.  The young ladies, and other people,

crowded around and showed a great deal of sympathy,

but that did not help matters; for my friends said they

did not want sympathy, they wanted a back alley and solitude.







CHAPTER XX

[My Precious, Priceless Tear-Jug]



Next morning brought good news--our trunks had arrived

from Hamburg at last.  Let this be a warning to the reader.

The Germans are very conscientious, and this trait makes

them very particular.  Therefore if you tell a German you

want a thing done immediately, he takes you at your word;

he thinks you mean what you say; so he does that thing

immediately--according to his idea of immediately

--which is about a week; that is, it is a week if it refers

to the building of a garment, or it is an hour and a half

if it refers to the cooking of a trout.  Very well; if you

tell a German to send your trunk to you by "slow freight,"

he takes you at your word; he sends it by "slow freight,"

and you cannot imagine how long you will go on enlarging

your admiration of the expressiveness of that phrase

in the German tongue, before you get that trunk.

The hair on my trunk was soft and thick and youthful,

when I got it ready for shipment in Hamburg; it was baldheaded

when it reached Heidelberg.  However, it was still sound,

that was a comfort, it was not battered in the least;

the baggagemen seemed to be conscientiously careful,

in Germany, of the baggage entrusted to their hands.

There was nothing now in the way of our departure, therefore we

set about our preparations.



Naturally my chief solicitude was about my collection

of Ceramics.  Of course I could not take it with me,

that would be inconvenient, and dangerous besides.

I took advice, but the best brick-a-brackers were divided

as to the wisest course to pursue; some said pack the

collection and warehouse it; others said try to get it

into the Grand Ducal Museum at Mannheim for safe keeping.

So I divided the collection, and followed the advice of

both parties.  I set aside, for the Museum, those articles

which were the most frail and precious.



Among these was my Etruscan tear-jug. I have made a little

sketch of it here; [Figure 6] that thing creeping up

the side is not a bug, it is a hole.  I bought this

tear-jug of a dealer in antiquities for four hundred

and fifty dollars.  It is very rare.  The man said the

Etruscans used to keep tears or something in these things,

and that it was very hard to get hold of a broken one, now.

I also set aside my Henri II.  plate.  See sketch

from my pencil; [Figure 7] it is in the main correct,

though I think I have foreshortened one end of it a little

too much, perhaps.  This is very fine and rare; the shape

is exceedingly beautiful and unusual.  It has wonderful

decorations on it, but I am not able to reproduce them.

It cost more than the tear-jug, as the dealer said

there was not another plate just like it in the world.

He said there was much false Henri II ware around,

but that the genuineness of this piece was unquestionable.

He showed me its pedigree, or its history, if you please;

it was a document which traced this plate's movements

all the way down from its birth--showed who bought it,

from whom, and what he paid for it--from the first buyer

down to me, whereby I saw that it had gone steadily up

from thirty-five cents to seven hundred dollars.  He said

that the whole Ceramic world would be informed that it

was now in my possession and would make a note of it,

with the price paid.  [Figure 8]



There were Masters in those days, but, alas--it is not so now.

Of course the main preciousness of this piece lies in its color;

it is that old sensuous, pervading, ramifying, interpolating,

transboreal blue which is the despair of modern art.

The little sketch which I have made of this gem cannot

and does not do it justice, since I have been obliged

to leave out the color.  But I've got the expression, though.



However, I must not be frittering away the reader's time

with these details.  I did not intend to go into any

detail at all, at first, but it is the failing of the

true ceramiker, or the true devotee in any department

of brick-a-brackery, that once he gets his tongue or his

pen started on his darling theme, he cannot well stop

until he drops from exhaustion.  He has no more sense

of the flight of time than has any other lover when talking

of his sweetheart.  The very "marks" on the bottom

of a piece of rare crockery are able to throw me into

a gibbering ecstasy; and I could forsake a drowning

relative to help dispute about whether the stopple

of a departed Buon Retiro scent-bottle was genuine or spurious.



Many people say that for a male person, bric-a-brac hunting

is about as robust a business as making doll-clothes,

or decorating Japanese pots with decalcomanie butterflies

would be, and these people fling mud at the elegant Englishman,

Byng, who wrote a book called THE BRIC-A-BRAC HUNTER,

and make fun of him for chasing around after what they choose

to call "his despicable trifles"; and for "gushing" over

these trifles; and for exhibiting his "deep infantile delight"

in what they call his "tuppenny collection of beggarly

trivialities"; and for beginning his book with a picture

of himself seated, in a "sappy, self-complacent attitude,

in the midst of his poor little ridiculous bric-a-brac junk

shop."



It is easy to say these things; it is easy to revile us,

easy to despise us; therefore, let these people rail on;

they cannot feel as Byng and I feel--it is their loss,

not ours.  For my part I am content to be a brick-a-bracker

and a ceramiker--more, I am proud to be so named.

I am proud to know that I lose my reason as immediately

in the presence of a rare jug with an illustrious mark

on the bottom of it, as if I had just emptied that jug.

Very well; I packed and stored a part of my collection,

and the rest of it I placed in the care of the Grand Ducal

Museum in Mannheim, by permission.  My Old Blue China

Cat remains there yet.  I presented it to that excellent

institution.



I had but one misfortune with my things.  An egg which I

had kept back from breakfast that morning, was broken

in packing.  It was a great pity.  I had shown it to the

best connoisseurs in Heidelberg, and they all said it

was an antique.  We spent a day or two in farewell visits,

and then left for Baden-Baden. We had a pleasant

trip to it, for the Rhine valley is always lovely.

The only trouble was that the trip was too short.

If I remember rightly it only occupied a couple of hours,

therefore I judge that the distance was very little,

if any, over fifty miles.  We quitted the train at Oos,

and walked the entire remaining distance to Baden-Baden,

with the exception of a lift of less than an hour which we

got on a passing wagon, the weather being exhaustingly warm.

We came into town on foot.



One of the first persons we encountered, as we walked

up the street, was the Rev. Mr. ------, an old friend

from America--a lucky encounter, indeed, for his is

a most gentle, refined, and sensitive nature, and his

company and companionship are a genuine refreshment.

We knew he had been in Europe some time, but were not

at all expecting to run across him.  Both parties burst

forth into loving enthusiasms, and Rev. Mr. ------said:



"I have got a brimful reservoir of talk to pour out

on you, and an empty one ready and thirsting to receive

what you have got; we will sit up till midnight

and have a good satisfying interchange, for I leave

here early in the morning." We agreed to that, of course.



I had been vaguely conscious, for a while, of a person

who was walking in the street abreast of us; I had glanced

furtively at him once or twice, and noticed that he

was a fine, large, vigorous young fellow, with an open,

independent countenance, faintly shaded with a pale

and even almost imperceptible crop of early down,

and that he was clothed from head to heel in cool and

enviable snow-white linen.  I thought I had also noticed

that his head had a sort of listening tilt to it.

Now about this time the Rev. Mr. ------said:



"The sidewalk is hardly wide enough for three, so I will

walk behind; but keep the talk going, keep the talk going,

there's no time to lose, and you may be sure I will do

my share." He ranged himself behind us, and straightway that

stately snow-white young fellow closed up to the sidewalk

alongside him, fetched him a cordial slap on the shoulder

with his broad palm, and sung out with a hearty cheeriness:



"AMERICANS for two-and-a-half and the money up! HEY?"



The Reverend winced, but said mildly:



"Yes--we are Americans."



"Lord love you, you can just bet that's what _I_ am,

every time! Put it there!"



He held out his Sahara of his palm, and the Reverend laid

his diminutive hand in it, and got so cordial a shake

that we heard his glove burst under it.



"Say, didn't I put you up right?"



"Oh, yes."



"Sho! I spotted you for MY kind the minute I heard

your clack.  You been over here long?"



"About four months.  Have you been over long?"



"LONG? Well, I should say so! Going on two YEARS,

by geeminy! Say, are you homesick?"



"No, I can't say that I am.  Are you?"



"Oh, HELL, yes!" This with immense enthusiasm.



The Reverend shrunk a little, in his clothes, and we

were aware, rather by instinct than otherwise, that he

was throwing out signals of distress to us; but we did

not interfere or try to succor him, for we were quite happy.



The young fellow hooked his arm into the Reverend's, now,

with the confiding and grateful air of a waif who has

been longing for a friend, and a sympathetic ear,

and a chance to lisp once more the sweet accents of the

mother-tongue--and then he limbered up the muscles

of his mouth and turned himself loose--and with such a

relish! Some of his words were not Sunday-school words,

so I am obliged to put blanks where they occur.



"Yes indeedy! If _I_ ain't an American there AIN'T

any Americans, that's all.  And when I heard you fellows

gassing away in the good old American language, I'm ------

if it wasn't all I could do to keep from hugging you! My

tongue's all warped with trying to curl it around these

------forsaken wind-galled nine-jointed German words here;

now I TELL you it's awful good to lay it over a Christian

word once more and kind of let the old taste soak it.

I'm from western New York.  My name is Cholley Adams.

I'm a student, you know.  Been here going on two years.

I'm learning to be a horse-doctor! I LIKE that part of it,

you know, but ------these people, they won't learn a fellow

in his own language, they make him learn in German; so before

I could tackle the horse-doctoring I had to tackle this

miserable language.



"First off, I thought it would certainly give me

the botts, but I don't mind now.  I've got it where the

hair's short, I think; and dontchuknow, they made me

learn Latin, too.  Now between you and me, I wouldn't

give a ------for all the Latin that was ever jabbered;

and the first thing _I_ calculate to do when I get through,

is to just sit down and forget it.  'Twon't take me long,

and I don't mind the time, anyway.  And I tell you what!

the difference between school-teaching over yonder and

school-teaching over here--sho! WE don't know anything

about it! Here you're got to peg and peg and peg and there

just ain't any let-up--and what you learn here, you've got

to KNOW, dontchuknow --or else you'll have one of these

------spavined, spectacles, ring-boned, knock-kneed old

professors in your hair.  I've been here long ENOUGH,

and I'm getting blessed tired of it, mind I TELL you.

The old man wrote me that he was coming over in June,

and said he'd take me home in August, whether I was done

with my education or not, but durn him, he didn't come;

never said why; just sent me a hamper of Sunday-school

books, and told me to be good, and hold on a while.

I don't take to Sunday-school books, dontchuknow--I

don't hanker after them when I can get pie--but I

READ them, anyway, because whatever the old man tells

me to do, that's the thing that I'm a-going to DO,

or tear something, you know.  I buckled in and read

all those books, because he wanted me to; but that kind

of thing don't excite ME, I like something HEARTY.

But I'm awful homesick.  I'm homesick from ear-socket

to crupper, and from crupper to hock-joint; but it ain't

any use, I've got to stay here, till the old man drops

the rag and give the word--yes, SIR, right here in this

------country I've got to linger till the old man says

COME!--and you bet your bottom dollar, Johnny, it AIN'T

just as easy as it is for a cat to have twins!"



At the end of this profane and cordial explosion he

fetched a prodigious "WHOOSH!" to relieve his lungs

and make recognition of the heat, and then he straightway

dived into his narrative again for "Johnny's" benefit,

beginning, "Well, ------it ain't any use talking,

some of those old American words DO have a kind

of a bully swing to them; a man can EXPRESS himself

with 'em--a man can get at what he wants to SAY, dontchuknow."



When we reached our hotel and it seemed that he was

about to lose the Reverend, he showed so much sorrow,

and begged so hard and so earnestly that the Reverend's heart

was not hard enough to hold out against the pleadings

--so he went away with the parent-honoring student, like a

right Christian, and took supper with him in his lodgings,

and sat in the surf-beat of his slang and profanity

till near midnight, and then left him--left him pretty

well talked out, but grateful "clear down to his frogs,"

as he expressed it.  The Reverend said it had transpired

during the interview that "Cholley" Adams's father

was an extensive dealer in horses in western New York;

this accounted for Cholley's choice of a profession.

The Reverend brought away a pretty high opinion of

Cholley as a manly young fellow, with stuff in him for

a useful citizen; he considered him rather a rough gem,

but a gem, nevertheless.







CHAPTER XXI

[Insolent Shopkeepers and Gabbling Americans]



Baden-Baden sits in the lap of the hills, and the natural

and artificial beauties of the surroundings are combined

effectively and charmingly.  The level strip of ground

which stretches through and beyond the town is laid

out in handsome pleasure grounds, shaded by noble trees

and adorned at intervals with lofty and sparkling

fountain-jets. Thrice a day a fine band makes music

in the public promenade before the Conversation House,

and in the afternoon and evening that locality is populous

with fashionably dressed people of both sexes, who march

back and forth past the great music-stand and look very

much bored, though they make a show of feeling otherwise.

It seems like a rather aimless and stupid existence.

A good many of these people are there for a real

purpose, however; they are racked with rheumatism,

and they are there to stew it out in the hot baths.

These invalids looked melancholy enough, limping about on

their canes and crutches, and apparently brooding over

all sorts of cheerless things.  People say that Germany,

with her damp stone houses, is the home of rheumatism.

If that is so, Providence must have foreseen that it

would be so, and therefore filled the land with the

healing baths.  Perhaps no other country is so generously

supplied with medicinal springs as Germany.  Some of

these baths are good for one ailment, some for another;

and again, peculiar ailments are conquered by combining

the individual virtues of several different baths.

For instance, for some forms of disease, the patient drinks

the native hot water of Baden-Baden, with a spoonful

of salt from the Carlsbad springs dissolved in it.

That is not a dose to be forgotten right away.



They don't SELL this hot water; no, you go into the

great Trinkhalle, and stand around, first on one foot

and then on the other, while two or three young girls

sit pottering at some sort of ladylike sewing-work

in your neighborhood and can't seem to see you --polite

as three-dollar clerks in government offices.



By and by one of these rises painfully, and

"stretches"--stretches

fists and body heavenward till she raises her heels from

the floor, at the same time refreshing herself with a yawn

of such comprehensiveness that the bulk of her face disappears

behind her upper lip and one is able to see how she is

constructed inside--then she slowly closes her cavern,

brings down her fists and her heels, comes languidly forward,

contemplates you contemptuously, draws you a glass of hot water

and sets it down where you can get it by reaching for it.  You

take it and say:



"How much?"--and she returns you, with elaborate indifference,

a beggar's answer:



"NACH BELIEBE" (what you please.)



This thing of using the common beggar's trick and the common

beggar's shibboleth to put you on your liberality when you

were expecting a simple straightforward commercial transaction,

adds a little to your prospering sense of irritation.

You ignore her reply, and ask again:



"How much?"



--and she calmly, indifferently, repeats:



"NACH BELIEBE."



You are getting angry, but you are trying not to show it;

you resolve to keep on asking your question till she changes

her answer, or at least her annoyingly indifferent manner.

Therefore, if your case be like mine, you two fools

stand there, and without perceptible emotion of any kind,

or any emphasis on any syllable, you look blandly into each

other's eyes, and hold the following idiotic conversation:



"How much?"



"NACH BELIEBE."



"How much?"



"NACH BELIEBE."



"How much?"



"NACH BELIEBE."



"How much?"



"NACH BELIEBE."



"How much?"



"NACH BELIEBE."



"How much?"



"NACH BELIEBE."



I do not know what another person would have done,

but at this point I gave up; that cast-iron indifference,

that tranquil contemptuousness, conquered me, and I struck

my colors.  Now I knew she was used to receiving about a

penny from manly people who care nothing about the opinions

of scullery-maids, and about tuppence from moral cowards;

but I laid a silver twenty-five cent piece within her

reach and tried to shrivel her up with this sarcastic

speech:



"If it isn't enough, will you stoop sufficiently from

your official dignity to say so?"



She did not shrivel.  Without deigning to look at me at all,

she languidly lifted the coin and bit it!--to see if it

was good.  Then she turned her back and placidly waddled

to her former roost again, tossing the money into an open

till as she went along.  She was victor to the last,

you see.



I have enlarged upon the ways of this girl because they

are typical; her manners are the manners of a goodly

number of the Baden-Baden shopkeepers.  The shopkeeper

there swindles you if he can, and insults you whether

he succeeds in swindling you or not.  The keepers of

baths also take great and patient pains to insult you.

The frowsy woman who sat at the desk in the lobby

of the great Friederichsbad and sold bath tickets,

not only insulted me twice every day, with rigid fidelity

to her great trust, but she took trouble enough to cheat

me out of a shilling, one day, to have fairly entitled

her to ten.  Baden-Baden's splendid gamblers are gone,

only her microscopic knaves remain.



An English gentleman who had been living there

several years, said:



"If you could disguise your nationality, you would not

find any insolence here.  These shopkeepers detest the

English and despise the Americans; they are rude to both,

more especially to ladies of your nationality and mine.

If these go shopping without a gentleman or a man-servant,

they are tolerably sure to be subjected to petty insolences

--insolences of manner and tone, rather than word,

though words that are hard to bear are not always wanting.

I know of an instance where a shopkeeper tossed a coin back

to an American lady with the remark, snappishly uttered,

'We don't take French money here.' And I know of a case

where an English lady said to one of these shopkeepers,

'Don't you think you ask too much for this article?'

and he replied with the question, 'Do you think you are

obliged to buy it?' However, these people are not impolite

to Russians or Germans.  And as to rank, they worship that,

for they have long been used to generals and nobles.

If you wish to see what abysses servility can descend,

present yourself before a Baden-Baden shopkeeper in the

character of a Russian prince."



It is an inane town, filled with sham, and petty fraud,

and snobbery, but the baths are good.  I spoke with

many people, and they were all agreed in that.  I had

the twinges of rheumatism unceasingly during three years,

but the last one departed after a fortnight's bathing there,

and I have never had one since.  I fully believe I left my

rheumatism in Baden-Baden. Baden-Baden is welcome to it.

It was little, but it was all I had to give.  I would

have preferred to leave something that was catching,

but it was not in my power.



There are several hot springs there, and during two

thousand years they have poured forth a never-diminishing

abundance of the healing water.  This water is conducted

in pipe to the numerous bath-houses, and is reduced to

an endurable temperature by the addition of cold water.

The new Friederichsbad is a very large and beautiful building,

and in it one may have any sort of bath that has ever

been invented, and with all the additions of herbs and

drugs that his ailment may need or that the physician

of the establishment may consider a useful thing to put

into the water.  You go there, enter the great door,

get a bow graduated to your style and clothes from the

gorgeous portier, and a bath ticket and an insult from

the frowsy woman for a quarter; she strikes a bell and a

serving-man conducts you down a long hall and shuts you

into a commodious room which has a washstand, a mirror,

a bootjack, and a sofa in it, and there you undress

at your leisure.



The room is divided by a great curtain; you draw this

curtain aside, and find a large white marble bathtub,

with its rim sunk to the level of the floor,

and with three white marble steps leading down to it.

This tub is full of water which is as clear as crystal,

and is tempered to 28 degrees Re'aumur (about 95 degrees

Fahrenheit). Sunk into the floor, by the tub, is a covered

copper box which contains some warm towels and a sheet.

You look fully as white as an angel when you are stretched

out in that limpid bath.  You remain in it ten minutes,

the first time, and afterward increase the duration from

day to day, till you reach twenty-five or thirty minutes.

There you stop.  The appointments of the place are

so luxurious, the benefit so marked, the price so moderate,

and the insults so sure, that you very soon find yourself

adoring the Friederichsbad and infesting it.



We had a plain, simple, unpretending, good hotel,

in Baden-Baden--the Ho^tel de France--and alongside my room

I had a giggling, cackling, chattering family who always

went to bed just two hours after me and always got up two

hours ahead of me.  But this is common in German hotels;

the people generally go to bed long after eleven and get

up long before eight.  The partitions convey sound

like a drum-head, and everybody knows it; but no matter,

a German family who are all kindness and consideration

in the daytime make apparently no effort to moderate

their noises for your benefit at night.  They will sing,

laugh, and talk loudly, and bang furniture around in a most

pitiless way.  If you knock on your wall appealingly,

they will quiet down and discuss the matter softly among

themselves for a moment--then, like the mice, they fall

to persecuting you again, and as vigorously as before.

They keep cruelly late and early hours, for such noisy folk.



Of course, when one begins to find fault with foreign

people's ways, he is very likely to get a reminder to look

nearer home, before he gets far with it.  I open my note-book

to see if I can find some more information of a valuable

nature about Baden-Baden, and the first thing I fall upon is

this:



"BADEN-BADEN (no date). Lot of vociferous Americans

at breakfast this morning.  Talking AT everybody,

while pretending to talk among themselves.  On their

first travels, manifestly.  Showing off.  The usual

signs--airy, easy-going references to grand distances

and foreign places.  'Well GOOD-by, old fellow

--if I don't run across you in Italy, you hunt me up in

London before you sail.'"



The next item which I find in my note-book is this one:



"The fact that a band of 6,000 Indians are now murdering

our frontiersmen at their impudent leisure, and that we

are only able to send 1,200 soldiers against them,

is utilized here to discourage emigration to America.

The common people think the Indians are in New Jersey."



This is a new and peculiar argument against keeping our army

down to a ridiculous figure in the matter of numbers.

It is rather a striking one, too.  I have not distorted

the truth in saying that the facts in the above item,

about the army and the Indians, are made use of to

discourage emigration to America.  That the common

people should be rather foggy in their geography,

and foggy as to the location of the Indians, is a matter

for amusement, maybe, but not of surprise.



There is an interesting old cemetery in Baden-Baden, and

we spent several pleasant hours in wandering through it

and spelling out the inscriptions on the aged tombstones.

Apparently after a man has laid there a century or two,

and has had a good many people buried on top of him,

it is considered that his tombstone is not needed by him

any longer.  I judge so from the fact that hundreds

of old gravestones have been removed from the graves

and placed against the inner walls of the cemetery.

What artists they had in the old times! They chiseled angels

and cherubs and devils and skeletons on the tombstones

in the most lavish and generous way--as to supply--but

curiously grotesque and outlandish as to form.  It is not

always easy to tell which of the figures belong among

the blest and which of them among the opposite party.

But there was an inscription, in French, on one of those

old stones, which was quaint and pretty, and was plainly

not the work of any other than a poet.  It was to this

effect:



    Here Reposes in God, Caroline de Clery, a Religieuse

    of St. Denis aged 83 years--and blind.  The light

    was restored to her in Baden the 5th of January, 1839



We made several excursions on foot to the neighboring villages,

over winding and beautiful roads and through enchanting

woodland scenery.  The woods and roads were similar to those

at Heidelberg, but not so bewitching.  I suppose that roads

and woods which are up to the Heidelberg mark are rare in the

world.



Once we wandered clear away to La Favorita Palace,

which is several miles from Baden-Baden. The grounds

about the palace were fine; the palace was a curiosity.

It was built by a Margravine in 1725, and remains as she

left it at her death.  We wandered through a great many

of its rooms, and they all had striking peculiarities

of decoration.  For instance, the walls of one room were

pretty completely covered with small pictures of the

Margravine in all conceivable varieties of fanciful costumes,

some of them male.



The walls of another room were covered with grotesquely

and elaborately figured hand-wrought tapestry.

The musty ancient beds remained in the chambers,

and their quilts and curtains and canopies were decorated

with curious handwork, and the walls and ceilings frescoed

with historical and mythological scenes in glaring colors.

There was enough crazy and rotten rubbish in the building

to make a true brick-a-bracker green with envy.

A painting in the dining-hall verged upon the indelicate

--but then the Margravine was herself a trifle indelicate.



It is in every way a wildly and picturesquely decorated house,

and brimful of interest as a reflection of the character

and tastes of that rude bygone time.



In the grounds, a few rods from the palace, stands the

Margravine's chapel, just as she left it--a coarse

wooden structure, wholly barren of ornament.  It is said

that the Margravine would give herself up to debauchery

and exceedingly fast living for several months at a time,

and then retire to this miserable wooden den and spend

a few months in repenting and getting ready for another

good time.  She was a devoted Catholic, and was perhaps

quite a model sort of a Christian as Christians went then,

in high life.



Tradition says she spent the last two years of her life in the

strange den I have been speaking of, after having indulged

herself in one final, triumphant, and satisfying spree.

She shut herself up there, without company, and without

even a servant, and so abjured and forsook the world.

In her little bit of a kitchen she did her own cooking;

she wore a hair shirt next the skin, and castigated herself

with whips--these aids to grace are exhibited there yet.

She prayed and told her beads, in another little room,

before a waxen Virgin niched in a little box against the wall;

she bedded herself like a slave.



In another small room is an unpainted wooden table,

and behind it sit half-life-size waxen figures of the

Holy Family, made by the very worst artist that ever

lived, perhaps, and clothed in gaudy, flimsy drapery.

[1] The margravine used to bring her meals to this table

and DINE WITH THE HOLY FAMILY.  What an idea that was!

What a grisly spectacle it must have been! Imagine it:

Those rigid, shock-headed figures, with corpsy complexions

and fish glass eyes, occupying one side of the table

in the constrained attitudes and dead fixedness that

distinguish all men that are born of wax, and this wrinkled,

smoldering old fire-eater occupying the other side,

mumbling her prayers and munching her sausages in the ghostly

stillness and shadowy indistinctness of a winter twilight.

It makes one feel crawly even to think of it.



1.  The Savior was represented as a lad of about fifteen

    years of age.  This figure had lost one eye.



In this sordid place, and clothed, bedded, and fed like

a pauper, this strange princess lived and worshiped during

two years, and in it she died.  Two or three hundred

years ago, this would have made the poor den holy ground;

and the church would have set up a miracle-factory there

and made plenty of money out of it.  The den could be moved

into some portions of France and made a good property even now.







CHAPTER XXII

[The Black Forest and Its Treasures]



From Baden-Baden we made the customary trip into the

Black Forest.  We were on foot most of the time.  One cannot

describe those noble woods, nor the feeling with which they

inspire him.  A feature of the feeling, however, is a deep

sense of contentment; another feature of it is a buoyant,

boyish gladness; and a third and very conspicuous feature

of it is one's sense of the remoteness of the work-day

world and his entire emancipation from it and its affairs.



Those woods stretch unbroken over a vast region;

and everywhere they are such dense woods, and so still,

and so piney and fragrant.  The stems of the trees are trim

and straight, and in many places all the ground is hidden

for miles under a thick cushion of moss of a vivid green color,

with not a decayed or ragged spot in its surface, and not

a fallen leaf or twig to mar its immaculate tidiness.

A rich cathedral gloom pervades the pillared aisles;

so the stray flecks of sunlight that strike a trunk

here and a bough yonder are strongly accented,

and when they strike the moss they fairly seem to burn.

But the weirdest effect, and the most enchanting is that

produced by the diffused light of the low afternoon sun;

no single ray is able to pierce its way in, then, but the

diffused light takes color from moss and foliage,

and pervades the place like a faint, greet-tinted mist,

the theatrical fire of fairyland.  The suggestion of mystery

and the supernatural which haunts the forest at all times

is intensified by this unearthly glow.



We found the Black Forest farmhouses and villages

all that the Black Forest stories have pictured them.

The first genuine specimen which we came upon was

the mansion of a rich farmer and member of the Common

Council of the parish or district.  He was an important

personage in the land and so was his wife also,

of course.  His daughter was the "catch" of the region,

and she may be already entering into immortality as the

heroine of one of Auerbach's novels, for all I know.

We shall see, for if he puts her in I shall recognize her

by her Black Forest clothes, and her burned complexion,

her plump figure, her fat hands, her dull expression,

her gentle spirit, her generous feet, her bonnetless head,

and the plaited tails of hemp-colored hair hanging down

her back.



The house was big enough for a hotel; it was a hundred

feet long and fifty wide, and ten feet high, from ground

to eaves; but from the eaves to the comb of the mighty roof

was as much as forty feet, or maybe even more.  This roof

was of ancient mud-colored straw thatch a foot thick,

and was covered all over, except in a few trifling spots,

with a thriving and luxurious growth of green vegetation,

mainly moss.  The mossless spots were places where

repairs had been made by the insertion of bright new

masses of yellow straw.  The eaves projected far down,

like sheltering, hospitable wings.  Across the gable that

fronted the road, and about ten feet above the ground,

ran a narrow porch, with a wooden railing; a row of

small windows filled with very small panes looked upon

the porch.  Above were two or three other little windows,

one clear up under the sharp apex of the roof.

Before the ground-floor door was a huge pile of manure.

The door of the second-story room on the side of the house

was open, and occupied by the rear elevation of a cow.

Was this probably the drawing-room? All of the front

half of the house from the ground up seemed to be

occupied by the people, the cows, and the chickens,

and all the rear half by draught-animals and hay.

But the chief feature, all around this house, was the big

heaps of manure.



We became very familiar with the fertilizer in the Forest.

We fell unconsciously into the habit of judging of a man's

station in life by this outward and eloquent sign.

Sometimes we said, "Here is a poor devil, this is manifest."

When we saw a stately accumulation, we said, "Here is

a banker." When we encountered a country-seat surrounded

by an Alpine pomp of manure, we said, "Doubtless a duke

lives here."



The importance of this feature has not been properly

magnified in the Black Forest stories.  Manure is evidently

the Black-Forester's main treasure--his coin, his jewel,

his pride, his Old Master, his ceramics, his bric-a-brac,

his darling, his title to public consideration,

envy, veneration, and his first solicitude when he gets

ready to make his will.  The true Black Forest novel,

if it is ever written, will be skeletoned somewhat in this way:



SKELETON FOR A BLACK FOREST NOVEL



Rich old farmer, named Huss.  Has inherited great wealth

of manure, and by diligence has added to it.  It is

double-starred in Baedeker.  [1] The Black forest artist

paints it--his masterpiece.  The king comes to see it.

Gretchen Huss, daughter and heiress.  Paul Hoch,

young neighbor, suitor for Gretchen's hand--ostensibly;

he really wants the manure.  Hoch has a good many cart-loads

of the Black Forest currency himself, and therefore is a

good catch; but he is sordid, mean, and without sentiment,

whereas Gretchen is all sentiment and poetry.

Hans Schmidt, young neighbor, full of sentiment,

full of poetry, loves Gretchen, Gretchen loves him.

But he has no manure.  Old Huss forbids him in the house.

His heart breaks, he goes away to die in the woods,

far from the cruel world--for he says, bitterly, "What is man,

without manure?"



1.  When Baedeker's guide-books mention a thing and put

    two stars (**) after it, it means well worth visiting.

    M.T.



[Interval of six months.]



Paul Hoch comes to old Huss and says, "I am at last

as rich as you required--come and view the pile."

Old Huss views it and says, "It is sufficient--take

her and be happy,"--meaning Gretchen.



[Interval of two weeks.]



Wedding party assembled in old Huss's drawing-room. Hoch

placid and content, Gretchen weeping over her hard fate.

Enter old Huss's head bookkeeper.  Huss says fiercely,

"I gave you three weeks to find out why your books

don't balance, and to prove that you are not a defaulter;

the time is up--find me the missing property or you go

to prison as a thief." Bookkeeper: "I have found it."

"Where?" Bookkeeper (sternly--tragically): "In the bridegroom's

pile!--behold the thief--see him blench and tremble!"

[Sensation.] Paul Hoch: Lost, lost!"--falls over the cow

in a swoon and is handcuffed.  Gretchen: "Saved!" Falls

over the calf in a swoon of joy, but is caught in the arms

of Hans Schmidt, who springs in at that moment.  Old Huss:

"What, you here, varlet? Unhand the maid and quit the place."

Hans (still supporting the insensible girl): "Never! Cruel

old man, know that I come with claims which even you

cannot despise."



Huss: "What, YOU? name them."



Hans: "Listen then.  The world has forsaken me, I forsook

the world, I wandered in the solitude of the forest,

longing for death but finding none.  I fed upon roots,

and in my bitterness I dug for the bitterest,

loathing the sweeter kind.  Digging, three days agone,

I struck a manure mine!--a Golconda, a limitless Bonanza,

of solid manure! I can buy you ALL, and have mountain

ranges of manure left! Ha-ha, NOW thou smilest a smile!"

[Immense sensation.] Exhibition of specimens from the mine.

Old Huss (enthusiastically): "Wake her up, shake her up,

noble young man, she is yours!" Wedding takes place on

the spot; bookkeeper restored to his office and emoluments;

Paul Hoch led off to jail.  The Bonanza king of the Black

Forest lives to a good old age, blessed with the love of his

wife and of his twenty-seven children, and the still sweeter

envy of everybody around.



We took our noon meal of fried trout one day at the Plow Inn,

in a very pretty village (Ottenhoefen), and then went into

the public room to rest and smoke.  There we found nine

or ten Black Forest grandees assembled around a table.

They were the Common Council of the parish.  They had

gathered there at eight o'clock that morning to elect

a new member, and they had now been drinking beer four

hours at the new member's expense.  They were men of fifty

or sixty years of age, with grave good-natured faces,

and were all dressed in the costume made familiar to us

by the Black Forest stories; broad, round-topped black felt

hats with the brims curled up all round; long red waistcoats

with large metal buttons, black alpaca coats with the

waists up between the shoulders.  There were no speeches,

there was but little talk, there were no frivolities;

the Council filled themselves gradually, steadily, but surely,

with beer, and conducted themselves with sedate decorum,

as became men of position, men of influence, men of manure.



We had a hot afternoon tramp up the valley, along the grassy

bank of a rushing stream of clear water, past farmhouses,

water-mills, and no end of wayside crucifixes and saints

and Virgins.  These crucifixes, etc., are set up in

memory of departed friends, by survivors, and are almost

as frequent as telegraph-poles are in other lands.



We followed the carriage-road, and had our usual luck;

we traveled under a beating sun, and always saw the shade

leave the shady places before we could get to them.

In all our wanderings we seldom managed to strike

a piece of road at its time for being shady.  We had a

particularly hot time of it on that particular afternoon,

and with no comfort but what we could get out of the fact

that the peasants at work away up on the steep mountainsides

above our heads were even worse off than we were.

By and by it became impossible to endure the intolerable

glare and heat any longer; so we struck across the ravine

and entered the deep cool twilight of the forest, to hunt

for what the guide-book called the "old road."



We found an old road, and it proved eventually to be the

right one, though we followed it at the time with the conviction

that it was the wrong one.  If it was the wrong one there

could be no use in hurrying; therefore we did not hurry,

but sat down frequently on the soft moss and enjoyed

the restful quiet and shade of the forest solitudes.

There had been distractions in the carriage-road

--school-children, peasants, wagons, troops of

pedestrianizing students from all over Germany

--but we had the old road to ourselves.



Now and then, while we rested, we watched the laborious

ant at his work.  I found nothing new in him--certainly

nothing to change my opinion of him.  It seems to me that

in the matter of intellect the ant must be a strangely

overrated bird.  During many summers, now, I have watched him,

when I ought to have been in better business, and I have

not yet come across a living ant that seemed to have any

more sense than a dead one.  I refer to the ordinary ant,

of course; I have had no experience of those wonderful

Swiss and African ones which vote, keep drilled armies,

hold slaves, and dispute about religion.  Those particular

ants may be all that the naturalist paints them,

but I am persuaded that the average ant is a sham.

I admit his industry, of course; he is the hardest-working

creature in the world--when anybody is looking--but his

leather-headedness is the point I make against him.

He goes out foraging, he makes a capture, and then what

does he do? Go home? No--he goes anywhere but home.

He doesn't know where home is.  His home may be only

three feet away--no matter, he can't find it.  He makes

his capture, as I have said; it is generally something

which can be of no sort of use to himself or anybody else;

it is usually seven times bigger than it ought to be;

he hunts out the awkwardest place to take hold of it;

he lifts it bodily up in the air by main force, and starts;

not toward home, but in the opposite direction; not calmly

and wisely, but with a frantic haste which is wasteful

of his strength; he fetches up against a pebble, and instead

of going around it, he climbs over it backward dragging

his booty after him, tumbles down on the other side,

jumps up in a passion, kicks the dust off his clothes,

moistens his hands, grabs his property viciously, yanks it

this way, then that, shoves it ahead of him a moment,

turns tail and lugs it after him another moment, gets madder

and madder, then presently hoists it into the air and goes

tearing away in an entirely new direction; comes to a weed;

it never occurs to him to go around it; no, he must climb it;

and he does climb it, dragging his worthless property

to the top--which is as bright a thing to do as it would

be for me to carry a sack of flour from Heidelberg to Paris

by way of Strasburg steeple; when he gets up there he

finds that that is not the place; takes a cursory glance

at the scenery and either climbs down again or tumbles down,

and starts off once more--as usual, in a new direction.

At the end of half an hour, he fetches up within six inches

of the place he started from and lays his burden down;

meantime he has been over all the ground for two yards around,

and climbed all the weeds and pebbles he came across.

Now he wipes the sweat from his brow, strokes his limbs,

and then marches aimlessly off, in as violently a hurry

as ever.  He does not remember to have ever seen it before;

he looks around to see which is not the way home, grabs his

bundle and starts; he goes through the same adventures he

had before; finally stops to rest, and a friend comes along.

Evidently the friend remarks that a last year's grasshopper

leg is a very noble acquisition, and inquires where he

got it.  Evidently the proprietor does not remember

exactly where he did get it, but thinks he got it "around

here somewhere." Evidently the friend contracts to help

him freight it home.  Then, with a judgment peculiarly

antic (pun not intended), then take hold of opposite ends

of that grasshopper leg and begin to tug with all their

might in opposite directions.  Presently they take a rest

and confer together.  They decide that something is wrong,

they can't make out what.  Then they go at it again,

just as before.  Same result.  Mutual recriminations follow.

Evidently each accuses the other of being an obstructionist.

They lock themselves together and chew each other's jaws

for a while; then they roll and tumble on the ground till

one loses a horn or a leg and has to haul off for repairs.

They make up and go to work again in the same old insane way,

but the crippled ant is at a disadvantage; tug as he may,

the other one drags off the booty and him at the end of it.

Instead of giving up, he hangs on, and gets his shins

bruised against every obstruction that comes in the way.

By and by, when that grasshopper leg has been dragged

all over the same old ground once more, it is finally

dumped at about the spot where it originally lay,

the two perspiring ants inspect it thoughtfully and decide

that dried grasshopper legs are a poor sort of property

after all, and then each starts off in a different

direction to see if he can't find an old nail or something

else that is heavy enough to afford entertainment and at

the same time valueless enough to make an ant want to own it.



There in the Black Forest, on the mountainside,

I saw an ant go through with such a performance as this

with a dead spider of fully ten times his own weight.

The spider was not quite dead, but too far gone to resist.

He had a round body the size of a pea.  The little ant

--observing that I was noticing--turned him on his back,

sunk his fangs into his throat, lifted him into the air and

started vigorously off with him, stumbling over little pebbles,

stepping on the spider's legs and tripping himself up,

dragging him backward, shoving him bodily ahead, dragging him

up stones six inches high instead of going around them,

climbing weeds twenty times his own height and jumping

from their summits--and finally leaving him in the middle

of the road to be confiscated by any other fool of an

ant that wanted him.  I measured the ground which this

ass traversed, and arrived at the conclusion that what he

had accomplished inside of twenty minutes would constitute

some such job as this--relatively speaking--for a man;

to wit: to strap two eight-hundred-pound horses together,

carry them eighteen hundred feet, mainly over (not around)

boulders averaging six feet high, and in the course

of the journey climb up and jump from the top of one

precipice like Niagara, and three steeples, each a hundred

and twenty feet high; and then put the horses down,

in an exposed place, without anybody to watch them,

and go off to indulge in some other idiotic miracle for

vanity's sake.



Science has recently discovered that the ant does not

lay up anything for winter use.  This will knock him

out of literature, to some extent.  He does not work,

except when people are looking, and only then when the

observer has a green, naturalistic look, and seems to be

taking notes.  This amounts to deception, and will injure

him for the Sunday-schools. He has not judgment enough

to know what is good to eat from what isn't. This amounts

to ignorance, and will impair the world's respect for him.

He cannot stroll around a stump and find his way home again.

This amounts to idiocy, and once the damaging fact

is established, thoughtful people will cease to look

up to him, the sentimental will cease to fondle him.

His vaunted industry is but a vanity and of no effect,

since he never gets home with anything he starts with.

This disposes of the last remnant of his reputation

and wholly destroys his main usefulness as a moral agent,

since it will make the sluggard hesitate to go to him

any more.  It is strange, beyond comprehension, that so

manifest a humbug as the ant has been able to fool so

many nations and keep it up so many ages without being

found out.



The ant is strong, but we saw another strong thing,

where we had not suspected the presence of much muscular

power before.  A toadstool--that vegetable which springs

to full growth in a single night--had torn loose and

lifted a matted mass of pine needles and dirt of twice

its own bulk into the air, and supported it there,

like a column supporting a shed.  Ten thousand toadstools,

with the right purchase, could lift a man, I suppose.

But what good would it do?



All our afternoon's progress had been uphill.  About five

or half past we reached the summit, and all of a sudden

the dense curtain of the forest parted and we looked

down into a deep and beautiful gorge and out over a

wide panorama of wooded mountains with their summits

shining in the sun and their glade-furrowed sides dimmed

with purple shade.  The gorge under our feet--called

Allerheiligen--afforded room in the grassy level at its

head for a cozy and delightful human nest, shut away

from the world and its botherations, and consequently

the monks of the old times had not failed to spy it out;

and here were the brown and comely ruins of their church

and convent to prove that priests had as fine an instinct

seven hundred years ago in ferreting out the choicest

nooks and corners in a land as priests have today.



A big hotel crowds the ruins a little, now, and drives

a brisk trade with summer tourists.  We descended

into the gorge and had a supper which would have been

very satisfactory if the trout had not been boiled.

The Germans are pretty sure to boil a trout or anything

else if left to their own devices.  This is an argument

of some value in support of the theory that they were

the original colonists of the wild islands of the coast

of Scotland.  A schooner laden with oranges was wrecked

upon one of those islands a few years ago, and the gentle

savages rendered the captain such willing assistance

that he gave them as many oranges as they wanted.

Next day he asked them how they liked them.  They shook

their heads and said:



"Baked, they were tough; and even boiled, they warn't

things for a hungry man to hanker after."



We went down the glen after supper.  It is beautiful--a

mixture of sylvan loveliness and craggy wildness.

A limpid torrent goes whistling down the glen, and toward

the foot of it winds through a narrow cleft between lofty

precipices and hurls itself over a succession of falls.

After one passes the last of these he has a backward

glimpse at the falls which is very pleasing--they rise

in a seven-stepped stairway of foamy and glittering cascades,

and make a picture which is as charming as it is unusual.







CHAPTER XXIII

[Nicodemus Dodge and the Skeleton]



We were satisfied that we could walk to Oppenau in

one day, now that we were in practice; so we set out

the next morning after breakfast determined to do it.

It was all the way downhill, and we had the loveliest

summer weather for it.  So we set the pedometer and then

stretched away on an easy, regular stride, down through

the cloven forest, drawing in the fragrant breath

of the morning in deep refreshing draughts, and wishing

we might never have anything to do forever but walk

to Oppenau and keep on doing it and then doing it over again.



Now, the true charm of pedestrianism does not lie

in the walking, or in the scenery, but in the talking.

The walking is good to time the movement of the tongue by,

and to keep the blood and the brain stirred up and active;

the scenery and the woodsy smells are good to bear in upon

a man an unconscious and unobtrusive charm and solace

to eye and soul and sense; but the supreme pleasure comes

from the talk.  It is no matter whether one talks wisdom

or nonsense, the case is the same, the bulk of the enjoyment

lies in the wagging of the gladsome jaw and the flapping

of the sympathetic ear.



And what motley variety of subjects a couple of people will

casually rake over in the course of a day's tramp! There

being no constraint, a change of subject is always in order,

and so a body is not likely to keep pegging at a single

topic until it grows tiresome.  We discussed everything

we knew, during the first fifteen or twenty minutes,

that morning, and then branched out into the glad, free,

boundless realm of the things we were not certain about.



Harris said that if the best writer in the world once got

the slovenly habit of doubling up his "haves" he could

never get rid of it while he lived.  That is to say,

if a man gets the habit of saying "I should have liked

to have known more about it" instead of saying simply

and sensibly, "I should have liked to know more about it,"

that man's disease is incurable.  Harris said that his sort

of lapse is to be found in every copy of every newspaper

that has ever been printed in English, and in almost all

of our books.  He said he had observed it in Kirkham's

grammar and in Macaulay.  Harris believed that milk-teeth

are commoner in men's mouths than those "doubled-up haves." [1]



1.  I do not know that there have not been moments in the

    course of the present session when I should have been

    very glad to have accepted the proposal of my noble friend,

    and to have exchanged parts in some of our evenings

    of work.--[From a Speech of the English Chancellor

    of the Exchequer, August, 1879.]



That changed the subject to dentistry.  I said I believed

the average man dreaded tooth-pulling more than amputation,

and that he would yell quicker under the former operation

than he would under the latter.  The philosopher Harris

said that the average man would not yell in either case

if he had an audience.  Then he continued:



"When our brigade first went into camp on the Potomac,

we used to be brought up standing, occasionally, by an

ear-splitting howl of anguish.  That meant that a soldier

was getting a tooth pulled in a tent.  But the surgeons

soon changed that; they instituted open-air dentistry.

There never was a howl afterward--that is, from the man

who was having the tooth pulled.  At the daily dental

hour there would always be about five hundred soldiers

gathered together in the neighborhood of that dental chair

waiting to see the performance--and help; and the moment

the surgeon took a grip on the candidate's tooth and began

to lift, every one of those five hundred rascals would

clap his hand to his jaw and begin to hop around on one

leg and howl with all the lungs he had! It was enough

to raise your hair to hear that variegated and enormous

unanimous caterwaul burst out! With so big and so derisive

an audience as that, a suffer wouldn't emit a sound though

you pulled his head off.  The surgeons said that pretty

often a patient was compelled to laugh, in the midst

of his pangs, but that had never caught one crying out,

after the open-air exhibition was instituted."



Dental surgeons suggested doctors, doctors suggested death,

death suggested skeletons--and so, by a logical process

the conversation melted out of one of these subjects

and into the next, until the topic of skeletons raised up

Nicodemus Dodge out of the deep grave in my memory where he

had lain buried and forgotten for twenty-five years.

When I was a boy in a printing-office in Missouri,

a loose-jointed, long-legged, tow-headed, jeans-clad

countrified cub of about sixteen lounged in one day,

and without removing his hands from the depths

of his trousers pockets or taking off his faded ruin

of a slouch hat, whose broken rim hung limp and ragged

about his eyes and ears like a bug-eaten cabbage leaf,

stared indifferently around, then leaned his hip

against the editor's table, crossed his mighty brogans,

aimed at a distant fly from a crevice in his upper teeth,

laid him low, and said with composure:



"Whar's the boss?"



"I am the boss," said the editor, following this curious

bit of architecture wonderingly along up to its clock-face

with his eye.



"Don't want anybody fur to learn the business, 'tain't likely?"



"Well, I don't know.  Would you like to learn it?"



"Pap's so po' he cain't run me no mo', so I want to git

a show somers if I kin, 'taint no diffunce what--I'm strong

and hearty, and I don't turn my back on no kind of work,

hard nur soft."



"Do you think you would like to learn the printing business?"



"Well, I don't re'ly k'yer a durn what I DO learn,

so's I git a chance fur to make my way.  I'd jist as soon

learn print'n's anything."



"Can you read?"



"Yes--middlin'."



"Write?"



"Well, I've seed people could lay over me thar."



"Cipher?"



"Not good enough to keep store, I don't reckon,

but up as fur as twelve-times-twelve I ain't no slouch.

'Tother side of that is what gits me."



"Where is your home?"



"I'm f'm old Shelby."



"What's your father's religious denomination?"



"Him? Oh, he's a blacksmith."



"No, no--I don't mean his trade.  What's his RELIGIOUS

DENOMINATION?"



"OH--I didn't understand you befo'. He's a Freemason."



"No, no, you don't get my meaning yet.  What I mean is,

does he belong to any CHURCH?"



"NOW you're talkin'! Couldn't make out what you was a-tryin'

to git through yo' head no way.  B'long to a CHURCH! Why,

boss, he's ben the pizenest kind of Free-will Babtis'

for forty year.  They ain't no pizener ones 'n what HE is.

Mighty good man, pap is.  Everybody says that.  If they

said any diffrunt they wouldn't say it whar _I_ wuz

--not MUCH they wouldn't."



"What is your own religion?"



"Well, boss, you've kind o' got me, there--and yit

you hain't got me so mighty much, nuther.  I think 't

if a feller he'ps another feller when he's in trouble,

and don't cuss, and don't do no mean things, nur noth'n'

he ain' no business to do, and don't spell the Saviour's

name with a little g, he ain't runnin' no resks--he's

about as saift as he b'longed to a church."



"But suppose he did spell it with a little g--what then?"



"Well, if he done it a-purpose, I reckon he wouldn't

stand no chance--he OUGHTN'T to have no chance, anyway,

I'm most rotten certain 'bout that."



"What is your name?"



"Nicodemus Dodge."



"I think maybe you'll do, Nicodemus.  We'll give you

a trial, anyway."



"All right."



"When would you like to begin?"



"Now."



So, within ten minutes after we had first glimpsed this

nondescript he was one of us, and with his coat off

and hard at it.



Beyond that end of our establishment which was furthest

from the street, was a deserted garden, pathless,

and thickly grown with the bloomy and villainous "jimpson"

weed and its common friend the stately sunflower.

In the midst of this mournful spot was a decayed and aged

little "frame" house with but one room, one window, and no

ceiling--it had been a smoke-house a generation before.

Nicodemus was given this lonely and ghostly den as a bedchamber.



The village smarties recognized a treasure in Nicodemus,

right away--a butt to play jokes on.  It was easy to see

that he was inconceivably green and confiding.  George Jones

had the glory of perpetrating the first joke on him;

he gave him a cigar with a firecracker in it and winked

to the crowd to come; the thing exploded presently and swept

away the bulk of Nicodemus's eyebrows and eyelashes.

He simply said:



"I consider them kind of seeg'yars dangersome,"--and

seemed to suspect nothing.  The next evening Nicodemus

waylaid George and poured a bucket of ice-water over him.



One day, while Nicodemus was in swimming, Tom McElroy

"tied" his clothes.  Nicodemus made a bonfire of Tom's

by way of retaliation.



A third joke was played upon Nicodemus a day or two later--he

walked up the middle aisle of the village church, Sunday night,

with a staring handbill pinned between his shoulders.

The joker spent the remainder of the night, after church,

in the cellar of a deserted house, and Nicodemus sat on

the cellar door till toward breakfast-time to make sure

that the prisoner remembered that if any noise was made,

some rough treatment would be the consequence.  The cellar

had two feet of stagnant water in it, and was bottomed

with six inches of soft mud.



But I wander from the point.  It was the subject of

skeletons that brought this boy back to my recollection.

Before a very long time had elapsed, the village smarties

began to feel an uncomfortable consciousness of not having

made a very shining success out of their attempts on the

simpleton from "old Shelby." Experimenters grew scarce

and chary.  Now the young doctor came to the rescue.

There was delight and applause when he proposed to scare

Nicodemus to death, and explained how he was going to do it.

He had a noble new skeleton--the skeleton of the late

and only local celebrity, Jimmy Finn, the village

drunkard--a grisly piece of property which he had bought

of Jimmy Finn himself, at auction, for fifty dollars,

under great competition, when Jimmy lay very sick in

the tan-yard a fortnight before his death.  The fifty

dollars had gone promptly for whiskey and had considerably

hurried up the change of ownership in the skeleton.

The doctor would put Jimmy Finn's skeleton in Nicodemus's

bed!



This was done--about half past ten in the evening.

About Nicodemus's usual bedtime--midnight--the village

jokers came creeping stealthily through the jimpson

weeds and sunflowers toward the lonely frame den.

They reached the window and peeped in.  There sat the

long-legged pauper, on his bed, in a very short shirt,

and nothing more; he was dangling his legs contentedly

back and forth, and wheezing the music of "Camptown Races"

out of a paper-overlaid comb which he was pressing

against his mouth; by him lay a new jewsharp, a new top,

and solid india-rubber ball, a handful of painted marbles,

five pounds of "store" candy, and a well-gnawed slab of

gingerbread as big and as thick as a volume of sheet-music.

He had sold the skeleton to a traveling quack for three

dollars and was enjoying the result!



Just as we had finished talking about skeletons and were

drifting into the subject of fossils, Harris and I heard

a shout, and glanced up the steep hillside.  We saw men

and women standing away up there looking frightened,

and there was a bulky object tumbling and floundering

down the steep slope toward us.  We got out of the way,

and when the object landed in the road it proved to be a boy.

He had tripped and fallen, and there was nothing for him

to do but trust to luck and take what might come.



When one starts to roll down a place like that, there is

no stopping till the bottom is reached.  Think of people

FARMING on a slant which is so steep that the best you can

say of it--if you want to be fastidiously accurate--is,

that it is a little steeper than a ladder and not quite

so steep as a mansard roof.  But that is what they do.

Some of the little farms on the hillside opposite Heidelberg

were stood up "edgeways." The boy was wonderfully jolted up,

and his head was bleeding, from cuts which it had got from

small stones on the way.



Harris and I gathered him up and set him on a stone,

and by that time the men and women had scampered down

and brought his cap.



Men, women, and children flocked out from neighboring

cottages and joined the crowd; the pale boy was petted,

and stared at, and commiserated, and water was

brought for him to drink and bathe his bruises in.

And such another clatter of tongues! All who had seen

the catastrophe were describing it at once, and each

trying to talk louder than his neighbor; and one youth

of a superior genius ran a little way up the hill,

called attention, tripped, fell, rolled down among us,

and thus triumphantly showed exactly how the thing had been done.





Harris and I were included in all the descriptions;

how we were coming along; how Hans Gross shouted;

how we looked up startled; how we saw Peter coming like

a cannon-shot; how judiciously we got out of the way,

and let him come; and with what presence of mind we

picked him up and brushed him off and set him on a rock

when the performance was over.  We were as much heroes

as anybody else, except Peter, and were so recognized;

we were taken with Peter and the populace to Peter's

mother's cottage, and there we ate bread and cheese,

and drank milk and beer with everybody, and had a most

sociable good time; and when we left we had a handshake

all around, and were receiving and shouting back LEB'

WOHL's until a turn in the road separated us from our

cordial and kindly new friends forever.



We accomplished our undertaking.  At half past eight

in the evening we stepped into Oppenau, just eleven

hours and a half out of Allerheiligen--one hundred

and forty-six miles.  This is the distance by pedometer;

the guide-book and the Imperial Ordinance maps make

it only ten and a quarter--a surprising blunder,

for these two authorities are usually singularly accurate

in the matter of distances.







CHAPTER XXIV

[I Protect the Empress of Germany]



That was a thoroughly satisfactory walk--and the only

one we were ever to have which was all the way downhill.

We took the train next morning and returned to Baden-Baden

through fearful fogs of dust.  Every seat was crowded, too;

for it was Sunday, and consequently everybody was taking

a "pleasure" excursion.  Hot! the sky was an oven--and

a sound one, too, with no cracks in it to let in any air.

An odd time for a pleasure excursion, certainly!



Sunday is the great day on the continent--the free day,

the happy day.  One can break the Sabbath in a hundred

ways without committing any sin.



We do not work on Sunday, because the commandment forbids it;

the Germans do not work on Sunday, because the commandment

forbids it.  We rest on Sunday, because the commandment

requires it; the Germans rest on Sunday because the

commandment requires it.  But in the definition

of the word "rest" lies all the difference.  With us,

its Sunday meaning is, stay in the house and keep still;

with the Germans its Sunday and week-day meanings seem

to be the same--rest the TIRED PART, and never mind the

other parts of the frame; rest the tired part, and use

the means best calculated to rest that particular part.

Thus: If one's duties have kept him in the house all the week,

it will rest him to be out on Sunday; if his duties

have required him to read weighty and serious matter all

the week, it will rest him to read light matter on Sunday;

if his occupation has busied him with death and funerals

all the week, it will rest him to go to the theater Sunday

night and put in two or three hours laughing at a comedy;

if he is tired with digging ditches or felling trees

all the week, it will rest him to lie quiet in the house

on Sunday; if the hand, the arm, the brain, the tongue,

or any other member, is fatigued with inanition,

it is not to be rested by added a day's inanition;

but if a member is fatigued with exertion, inanition is

the right rest for it.  Such is the way in which the Germans

seem to define the word "rest"; that is to say, they rest

a member by recreating, recuperating, restore its forces.

But our definition is less broad.  We all rest alike

on Sunday--by secluding ourselves and keeping still,

whether that is the surest way to rest the most of us

or not.  The Germans make the actors, the preachers,

etc., work on Sunday.  We encourage the preachers,

the editors, the printers, etc., to work on Sunday,

and imagine that none of the sin of it falls upon us;

but I do not know how we are going to get around the fact

that if it is wrong for the printer to work at his trade

on Sunday it must be equally wrong for the preacher to

work at his, since the commandment has made no exception

in his favor.  We buy Monday morning's paper and read it,

and thus encourage Sunday printing.  But I shall never do

it again.



The Germans remember the Sabbath-day to keep it holy,

by abstaining from work, as commanded; we keep it

holy by abstaining from work, as commanded, and by

also abstaining from play, which is not commanded.

Perhaps we constructively BREAK the command to rest,

because the resting we do is in most cases only a name,

and not a fact.



These reasonings have sufficed, in a measure, to mend

the rent in my conscience which I made by traveling to

Baden-Baden that Sunday.  We arrived in time to furbish

up and get to the English church before services began.

We arrived in considerable style, too, for the landlord

had ordered the first carriage that could be found,

since there was no time to lose, and our coachman was

so splendidly liveried that we were probably mistaken

for a brace of stray dukes; why else were we honored

with a pew all to ourselves, away up among the very elect

at the left of the chancel? That was my first thought.

In the pew directly in front of us sat an elderly lady,

plainly and cheaply dressed; at her side sat a young

lady with a very sweet face, and she also was quite

simply dressed; but around us and about us were clothes

and jewels which it would do anybody's heart good to

worship in.



I thought it was pretty manifest that the elderly lady

was embarrassed at finding herself in such a conspicuous

place arrayed in such cheap apparel; I began to feel sorry

for her and troubled about her.  She tried to seem very busy

with her prayer-book and her responses, and unconscious

that she was out of place, but I said to myself, "She is

not succeeding--there is a distressed tremulousness

in her voice which betrays increasing embarrassment."

Presently the Savior's name was mentioned, and in her flurry

she lost her head completely, and rose and courtesied,

instead of making a slight nod as everybody else did.

The sympathetic blood surged to my temples and I turned and gave

those fine birds what I intended to be a beseeching look,

but my feelings got the better of me and changed it into

a look which said, "If any of you pets of fortune laugh

at this poor soul, you will deserve to be flayed for it."

Things went from bad to worse, and I shortly found myself

mentally taking the unfriended lady under my protection.

My mind was wholly upon her.  I forgot all about the sermon.

Her embarrassment took stronger and stronger hold upon her;

she got to snapping the lid of her smelling-bottle--it

made a loud, sharp sound, but in her trouble she snapped

and snapped away, unconscious of what she was doing.

The last extremity was reached when the collection-plate

began its rounds; the moderate people threw in pennies,

the nobles and the rich contributed silver, but she laid

a twenty-mark gold piece upon the book-rest before her

with a sounding slap! I said to myself, "She has parted

with all her little hoard to buy the consideration of these

unpitying people--it is a sorrowful spectacle." I did not

venture to look around this time; but as the service closed,

I said to myself, "Let them laugh, it is their opportunity;

but at the door of this church they shall see her step

into our fine carriage with us, and our gaudy coachman

shall drive her home."



Then she rose--and all the congregation stood while she

walked down the aisle.  She was the Empress of Germany!



No--she had not been so much embarrassed as I had supposed.

My imagination had got started on the wrong scent, and that

is always hopeless; one is sure, then, to go straight

on misinterpreting everything, clear through to the end.

The young lady with her imperial Majesty was a maid of

honor--and I had been taking her for one of her boarders,

all the time.



This is the only time I have ever had an Empress under

my personal protection; and considering my inexperience,

I wonder I got through with it so well.  I should have

been a little embarrassed myself if I had known earlier

what sort of a contract I had on my hands.



We found that the Empress had been in Baden-Baden

several days.  It is said that she never attends

any but the English form of church service.



I lay abed and read and rested from my journey's fatigues

the remainder of that Sunday, but I sent my agent to represent

me at the afternoon service, for I never allow anything

to interfere with my habit of attending church twice every

Sunday.



There was a vast crowd in the public grounds that night

to hear the band play the "Fremersberg." This piece tells

one of the old legends of the region; how a great noble

of the Middle Ages got lost in the mountains, and wandered

about with his dogs in a violent storm, until at last

the faint tones of a monastery bell, calling the monks

to a midnight service, caught his ear, and he followed

the direction the sounds came from and was saved.

A beautiful air ran through the music, without ceasing,

sometimes loud and strong, sometimes so soft that it

could hardly be distinguished--but it was always there;

it swung grandly along through the shrill whistling

of the storm-wind, the rattling patter of the rain,

and the boom and crash of the thunder; it wound soft

and low through the lesser sounds, the distant ones,

such as the throbbing of the convent bell, the melodious

winding of the hunter's horn, the distressed bayings

of his dogs, and the solemn chanting of the monks;

it rose again, with a jubilant ring, and mingled itself

with the country songs and dances of the peasants assembled

in the convent hall to cheer up the rescued huntsman

while he ate his supper.  The instruments imitated all

these sounds with a marvelous exactness.  More than one

man started to raise his umbrella when the storm burst

forth and the sheets of mimic rain came driving by;

it was hardly possible to keep from putting your hand

to your hat when the fierce wind began to rage and shriek;

and it was NOT possible to refrain from starting when

those sudden and charmingly real thunder-crashes were

let loose.



I suppose the "Fremersberg" is a very low-grade music;

I know, indeed, that it MUST be low-grade music, because it

delighted me, warmed me, moved me, stirred me, uplifted me,

enraptured me, that I was full of cry all the time,

and mad with enthusiasm.  My soul had never had such a

scouring out since I was born.  The solemn and majestic

chanting of the monks was not done by instruments,

but by men's voices; and it rose and fell, and rose again

in that rich confusion of warring sounds, and pulsing bells,

and the stately swing of that ever-present enchanting air,

and it seemed to me that nothing but the very lowest

of low-grade music COULD be so divinely beautiful.

The great crowd which the "Fremersberg" had called out was

another evidence that it was low-grade music; for only

the few are educated up to a point where high-grade music

gives pleasure.  I have never heard enough classic music

to be able to enjoy it.  I dislike the opera because I want

to love it and can't.



I suppose there are two kinds of music--one kind which

one feels, just as an oyster might, and another sort

which requires a higher faculty, a faculty which must

be assisted and developed by teaching.  Yet if base music

gives certain of us wings, why should we want any other?

But we do.  We want it because the higher and better

like it.  We want it without giving it the necessary

time and trouble; so we climb into that upper tier,

that dress-circle, by a lie; we PRETEND we like it.

I know several of that sort of people--and I propose

to be one of them myself when I get home with my fine

European education.



And then there is painting.  What a red rag is to a bull,

Turner's "Slave Ship" was to me, before I studied art.

Mr. Ruskin is educated in art up to a point where that

picture throws him into as mad an ecstasy of pleasure

as it used to throw me into one of rage, last year,

when I was ignorant.  His cultivation enables him--and me,

now--to see water in that glaring yellow mud, and natural

effects in those lurid explosions of mixed smoke and flame,

and crimson sunset glories; it reconciles him--and me,

now--to the floating of iron cable-chains and other

unfloatable things; it reconciles us to fishes swimming

around on top of the mud--I mean the water.  The most of

the picture is a manifest impossibility--that is to say,

a lie; and only rigid cultivation can enable a man to find

truth in a lie.  But it enabled Mr. Ruskin to do it,

and it has enabled me to do it, and I am thankful for it.

A Boston newspaper reporter went and took a look at the Slave

Ship floundering about in that fierce conflagration of reds

and yellows, and said it reminded him of a tortoise-shell

cat having a fit in a platter of tomatoes.  In my then

uneducated state, that went home to my non-cultivation,

and I thought here is a man with an unobstructed eye.

Mr. Ruskin would have said: This person is an ass.

That is what I would say, now. [1]



1.  Months after this was written, I happened into the National

    Gallery in London, and soon became so fascinated with the

    Turner pictures that I could hardly get away from the place.

    I went there often, afterward, meaning to see the rest

    of the gallery, but the Turner spell was too strong;

    it could not be shaken off.  However, the Turners

    which attracted me most did not remind me of the Slave Ship.



However, our business in Baden-Baden this time,

was to join our courier.  I had thought it best

to hire one, as we should be in Italy, by and by,

and we did not know the language.  Neither did he.

We found him at the hotel, ready to take charge of us.

I asked him if he was "all fixed." He said he was.

That was very true.  He had a trunk, two small satchels,

and an umbrella.  I was to pay him fifty-five dollars

a month and railway fares.  On the continent the railway

fare on a trunk is about the same it is on a man.

Couriers do not have to pay any board and lodging.

This seems a great saving to the tourist--at first.

It does not occur to the tourist that SOMEBODY pays that

man's board and lodging.  It occurs to him by and by,

however, in one of his lucid moments.







CHAPTER XXV

[Hunted by the Little Chamois]



Next morning we left in the train for Switzerland,

and reached Lucerne about ten o'clock at night.

The first discovery I made was that the beauty of the lake

had not been exaggerated.  Within a day or two I made

another discovery.  This was, that the lauded chamois

is not a wild goat; that it is not a horned animal;

that it is not shy; that it does not avoid human society;

and that there is no peril in hunting it.  The chamois is

a black or brown creature no bigger than a mustard seed;

you do not have to go after it, it comes after you;

it arrives in vast herds and skips and scampers all over

your body, inside your clothes; thus it is not shy,

but extremely sociable; it is not afraid of man, on the

contrary, it will attack him; its bite is not dangerous,

but neither is it pleasant; its activity has not been

overstated --if you try to put your finger on it,

it will skip a thousand times its own length at one jump,

and no eye is sharp enough to see where it lights.

A great deal of romantic nonsense has been written

about the Swiss chamois and the perils of hunting it,

whereas the truth is that even women and children

hunt it, and fearlessly; indeed, everybody hunts it;

the hunting is going on all the time, day and night,

in bed and out of it.  It is poetic foolishness to hunt

it with a gun; very few people do that; there is not

one man in a million who can hit it with a gun.

It is much easier to catch it than it is to shoot it,

and only the experienced chamois-hunter can do either.

Another common piece of exaggeration is that about the

"scarcity" of the chamois.  It is the reverse of scarce.

Droves of one hundred million chamois are not unusual

in the Swiss hotels.  Indeed, they are so numerous

as to be a great pest.  The romancers always dress up

the chamois-hunter in a fanciful and picturesque costume,

whereas the best way to hunt this game is to do it without

any costume at all.  The article of commerce called

chamois-skin is another fraud; nobody could skin a chamois,

it is too small.  The creature is a humbug in every way,

and everything which has been written about it is

sentimental exaggeration.  It was no pleasure to me to find

the chamois out, for he had been one of my pet illusions;

all my life it had been my dream to see him in his native

wilds some day, and engage in the adventurous sport

of chasing him from cliff to cliff.  It is no pleasure

to me to expose him, now, and destroy the reader's delight

in him and respect for him, but still it must be done,

for when an honest writer discovers an imposition it

is his simple duty to strip it bare and hurl it down

from its place of honor, no matter who suffers by it;

any other course would render him unworthy of the public

confidence.



Lucerne is a charming place.  It begins at the water's edge,

with a fringe of hotels, and scrambles up and spreads

itself over two or three sharp hills in a crowded,

disorderly, but picturesque way, offering to the eye

a heaped-up confusion of red roofs, quaint gables,

dormer windows, toothpick steeples, with here and there

a bit of ancient embattled wall bending itself over

the ridges, worm-fashion, and here and there an old square

tower of heavy masonry.  And also here and there a town

clock with only one hand--a hand which stretches across

the dial and has no joint in it; such a clock helps out

the picture, but you cannot tell the time of day by it.

Between the curving line of hotels and the lake is a broad

avenue with lamps and a double rank of low shade trees.

The lake-front is walled with masonry like a pier,

and has a railing, to keep people from walking overboard.

All day long the vehicles dash along the avenue, and nurses,

children, and tourists sit in the shade of the trees,

or lean on the railing and watch the schools of fishes

darting about in the clear water, or gaze out over the lake

at the stately border of snow-hooded mountains peaks.

Little pleasure steamers, black with people, are coming

and going all the time; and everywhere one sees young

girls and young men paddling about in fanciful rowboats,

or skimming along by the help of sails when there is any wind.

The front rooms of the hotels have little railed balconies,

where one may take his private luncheon in calm,

cool comfort and look down upon this busy and pretty

scene and enjoy it without having to do any of the work

connected with it.



Most of the people, both male and female, are in walking

costume, and carry alpenstocks.  Evidently, it is not

considered safe to go about in Switzerland, even in town,

without an alpenstock.  If the tourist forgets and

comes down to breakfast without his alpenstock he goes

back and gets it, and stands it up in the corner.

When his touring in Switzerland is finished, he does not

throw that broomstick away, but lugs it home with him,

to the far corners of the earth, although this costs him

more trouble and bother than a baby or a courier could.

You see, the alpenstock is his trophy; his name

is burned upon it; and if he has climbed a hill,

or jumped a brook, or traversed a brickyard with it,

he has the names of those places burned upon it, too.

Thus it is his regimental flag, so to speak, and bears

the record of his achievements.  It is worth three francs

when he buys it, but a bonanza could not purchase it

after his great deeds have been inscribed upon it.

There are artisans all about Switzerland whose trade it is

to burn these things upon the alpenstock of the tourist.

And observe, a man is respected in Switzerland according

to his alpenstock.  I found I could get no attention there,

while I carried an unbranded one.  However, branding is

not expected, so I soon remedied that.  The effect

upon the next detachment of tourists was very marked.

I felt repaid for my trouble.



Half of the summer horde in Switzerland is made up of

English people; the other half is made up of many nationalities,

the Germans leading and the Americans coming next.

The Americans were not as numerous as I had expected

they would be.



The seven-thirty table d'ho^te at the great Schweitzerhof

furnished a mighty array and variety of nationalities,

but it offered a better opportunity to observe costumes

than people, for the multitude sat at immensely long tables,

and therefore the faces were mainly seen in perspective;

but the breakfasts were served at small round tables,

and then if one had the fortune to get a table in the

midst of the assemblage he could have as many faces

to study as he could desire.  We used to try to guess out

the nationalities, and generally succeeded tolerably well.

Sometimes we tried to guess people's names; but that was

a failure; that is a thing which probably requires a good

deal of practice.  We presently dropped it and gave our

efforts to less difficult particulars.  One morning I

said:



"There is an American party."



Harris said:



"Yes--but name the state."



I named one state, Harris named another.  We agreed upon

one thing, however--that the young girl with the party

was very beautiful, and very tastefully dressed.

But we disagreed as to her age.  I said she was eighteen,

Harris said she was twenty.  The dispute between us

waxed warm, and I finally said, with a pretense of being

in earnest:



"Well, there is one way to settle the matter--I will go

and ask her."



Harris said, sarcastically, "Certainly, that is the thing

to do.  All you need to do is to use the common formula

over here: go and say, 'I'm an American!' Of course she

will be glad to see you."



Then he hinted that perhaps there was no great danger

of my venturing to speak to her.



I said, "I was only talking--I didn't intend to approach her,

but I see that you do not know what an intrepid person

I am.  I am not afraid of any woman that walks.

I will go and speak to this young girl."



The thing I had in my mind was not difficult.

I meant to address her in the most respectful way and ask

her to pardon me if her strong resemblance to a former

acquaintance of mine was deceiving me; and when she should

reply that the name I mentioned was not the name she bore,

I meant to beg pardon again, most respectfully, and retire.

There would be no harm done.  I walked to her table,

bowed to the gentleman, then turned to her and was about

to begin my little speech when she exclaimed:



"I KNEW I wasn't mistaken--I told John it was you!

John said it probably wasn't, but I knew I was right.

I said you would recognize me presently and come over;

and I'm glad you did, for I shouldn't have felt much flattered

if you had gone out of this room without recognizing me.

Sit down, sit down--how odd it is--you are the last person I

was ever expecting to see again."



This was a stupefying surprise.  It took my wits

clear away, for an instant.  However, we shook hands

cordially all around, and I sat down.  But truly this

was the tightest place I ever was in.  I seemed to vaguely

remember the girl's face, now, but I had no idea where I

had seen it before, or what named belonged with it.

I immediately tried to get up a diversion about Swiss scenery,

to keep her from launching into topics that might

betray that I did not know her, but it was of no use,

she went right along upon matters which interested her more:



"Oh dear, what a night that was, when the sea washed

the forward boats away--do you remember it?"



"Oh, DON'T I!" said I--but I didn't. I wished the sea

had washed the rudder and the smoke-stack and the captain

away--then I could have located this questioner.



"And don't you remember how frightened poor Mary was,

and how she cried?"



"Indeed I do!" said I. "Dear me, how it all comes back!"



I fervently wished it WOULD come back--but my memory was

a blank.  The wise way would have been to frankly own up;

but I could not bring myself to do that, after the young

girl had praised me so for recognizing her; so I went on,

deeper and deeper into the mire, hoping for a chance clue

but never getting one.  The Unrecognizable continued,

with vivacity:



"Do you know, George married Mary, after all?"



"Why, no! Did he?"



"Indeed he did.  He said he did not believe she was half

as much to blame as her father was, and I thought he

was right.  Didn't you?"



"Of course he was.  It was a perfectly plain case.

I always said so."



"Why, no you didn't!--at least that summer."



"Oh, no, not that summer.  No, you are perfectly right

about that.  It was the following winter that I said it."



"Well, as it turned out, Mary was not in the least

to blame --it was all her father's fault--at least

his and old Darley's."



It was necessary to say something--so I said:



"I always regarded Darley as a troublesome old thing."



"So he was, but then they always had a great affection

for him, although he had so many eccentricities.

You remember that when the weather was the least cold,

he would try to come into the house."



I was rather afraid to proceed.  Evidently Darley was not

a man--he must be some other kind of animal--possibly

a dog, maybe an elephant.  However, tails are common

to all animals, so I ventured to say:



"And what a tail he had!"



"ONE! He had a thousand!"



This was bewildering.  I did not quite know what to say,

so I only said:



"Yes, he WAS rather well fixed in the matter of tails."



"For a negro, and a crazy one at that, I should say he was,"

said she.



It was getting pretty sultry for me.  I said to myself,

"Is it possible she is going to stop there, and wait for

me to speak? If she does, the conversation is blocked.

A negro with a thousand tails is a topic which a person

cannot talk upon fluently and instructively without more

or less preparation.  As to diving rashly into such a

vast subject--"



But here, to my gratitude, she interrupted my thoughts

by saying:



"Yes, when it came to tales of his crazy woes, there was

simply no end to them if anybody would listen.  His own

quarters were comfortable enough, but when the weather

was cold, the family were sure to have his company--nothing

could keep him out of the house.  But they always bore it

kindly because he had saved Tom's life, years before.

You remember Tom?



"Oh, perfectly.  Fine fellow he was, too."



"Yes he was.  And what a pretty little thing his child was!"



"You may well say that.  I never saw a prettier child."



"I used to delight to pet it and dandle it and play

with it."



"So did I."



"You named it.  What WAS that name? I can't call it

to mind."



It appeared to me that the ice was getting pretty

thin, here.  I would have given something to know

what the child's was.  However, I had the good luck

to think of a name that would fit either sex--so I brought it

out:



"I named it Frances."



"From a relative, I suppose? But you named the one that died,

too--one that I never saw.  What did you call that one?"



I was out of neutral names, but as the child was dead

and she had never seen it, I thought I might risk a name

for it and trust to luck.  Therefore I said:



"I called that one Thomas Henry."



She said, musingly:



"That is very singular ... very singular."



I sat still and let the cold sweat run down.  I was

in a good deal of trouble, but I believed I could worry

through if she wouldn't ask me to name any more children.

I wondered where the lightning was going to strike next.

She was still ruminating over that last child's title,

but presently she said:



"I have always been sorry you were away at the time--I

would have had you name my child."



"YOUR child! Are you married?"



"I have been married thirteen years."



"Christened, you mean."



`"No, married.  The youth by your side is my son."



"It seems incredible--even impossible.  I do not mean

any harm by it, but would you mind telling me if you

are any over eighteen?--that is to say, will you tell

me how old you are?"



"I was just nineteen the day of the storm we were

talking about.  That was my birthday."



That did not help matters, much, as I did not know

the date of the storm.  I tried to think of some

non-committal thing to say, to keep up my end of the talk,

and render my poverty in the matter of reminiscences

as little noticeable as possible, but I seemed to be

about out of non-committal things.  I was about to say,

"You haven't changed a bit since then"--but that was risky.

I thought of saying, "You have improved ever so much

since then"--but that wouldn't answer, of course.

I was about to try a shy at the weather, for a saving change,

when the girl slipped in ahead of me and said:



"How I have enjoyed this talk over those happy old times

--haven't you?"



"I never have spent such a half-hour in all my life before!"

said I, with emotion; and I could have added, with a

near approach to truth, "and I would rather be scalped

than spend another one like it." I was holily grateful

to be through with the ordeal, and was about to make

my good-bys and get out, when the girl said:



"But there is one thing that is ever so puzzling to me."



"Why, what is that?"



"That dead child's name.  What did you say it was?"



Here was another balmy place to be in: I had forgotten the

child's name; I hadn't imagined it would be needed again.

However, I had to pretend to know, anyway, so I said:



"Joseph William."



The youth at my side corrected me, and said:



"No, Thomas Henry."



I thanked him--in words--and said, with trepidation:



"O yes--I was thinking of another child that I named--I

have named a great many, and I get them confused--this

one was named Henry Thompson--"



"Thomas Henry," calmly interposed the boy.



I thanked him again--strictly in words--and stammered

out:



"Thomas Henry--yes, Thomas Henry was the poor child's name.

I named him for Thomas--er--Thomas Carlyle, the great author,

you know--and Henry--er--er--Henry the Eight.  The parents

were very grateful to have a child named Thomas Henry."



"That makes it more singular than ever," murmured my

beautiful friend.



"Does it? Why?"



"Because when the parents speak of that child now,

they always call it Susan Amelia."



That spiked my gun.  I could not say anything.  I was entirely

out of verbal obliquities; to go further would be to lie,

and that I would not do; so I simply sat still and suffered

--sat mutely and resignedly there, and sizzled--for I

was being slowly fried to death in my own blushes.

Presently the enemy laughed a happy laugh and said:



"I HAVE enjoyed this talk over old times, but you have not.

I saw very soon that you were only pretending to know me,

and so as I had wasted a compliment on you in the beginning,

I made up my mind to punish you.  And I have succeeded

pretty well.  I was glad to see that you knew George and Tom

and Darley, for I had never heard of them before and therefore

could not be sure that you had; and I was glad to learn

the names of those imaginary children, too.  One can get

quite a fund of information out of you if one goes at

it cleverly.  Mary and the storm, and the sweeping away

of the forward boats, were facts--all the rest was fiction.

Mary was my sister; her full name was Mary ------. NOW

do you remember me?"



"Yes," I said, "I do remember you now; and you are as

hard-headed as you were thirteen years ago in that ship,

else you wouldn't have punished me so.  You haven't

change your nature nor your person, in any way at all;

you look as young as you did then, you are just as beautiful

as you were then, and you have transmitted a deal

of your comeliness to this fine boy.  There--if that

speech moves you any, let's fly the flag of truce,

with the understanding that I am conquered and confess it."



All of which was agreed to and accomplished, on the spot.

When I went back to Harris, I said:



"Now you see what a person with talent and address can do."



"Excuse me, I see what a person of colossal ignorance and

simplicity can do.  The idea of your going and intruding

on a party of strangers, that way, and talking for half

an hour; why I never heard of a man in his right mind

doing such a thing before.  What did you say to them?"



I never said any harm.  I merely asked the girl what her

name was."



"I don't doubt it.  Upon my word I don't. I think you

were capable of it.  It was stupid in me to let you go

over there and make such an exhibition of yourself.

But you know I couldn't really believe you would do such

an inexcusable thing.  What will those people think

of us? But how did you say it?--I mean the manner of it.

I hope you were not abrupt."



"No, I was careful about that.  I said, 'My friend and I

would like to know what your name is, if you don't mind.'"



"No, that was not abrupt.  There is a polish about it that

does you infinite credit.  And I am glad you put me in;

that was a delicate attention which I appreciate at its

full value.  What did she do?"



"She didn't do anything in particular.  She told me

her name."



"Simply told you her name.  Do you mean to say she did

not show any surprise?"



"Well, now I come to think, she did show something;

maybe it was surprise; I hadn't thought of that--I took

it for gratification."



"Oh, undoubtedly you were right; it must have been gratification;

it could not be otherwise than gratifying to be assaulted

by a stranger with such a question as that.  Then what did you

do?"



"I offered my hand and the party gave me a shake."



"I saw it! I did not believe my own eyes, at the time.

Did the gentleman say anything about cutting your throat?"



"No, they all seemed glad to see me, as far as I could judge."



"And do you know, I believe they were.  I think they said

to themselves, 'Doubtless this curiosity has got away from

his keeper--let us amuse ourselves with him.' There is

no other way of accounting for their facile docility.

You sat down.  Did they ASK you to sit down?"



"No, they did not ask me, but I suppose they did not think

of it."



"You have an unerring instinct.  What else did you do?

What did you talk about?"



"Well, I asked the girl how old she was."



"UNdoubtedly. Your delicacy is beyond praise.  Go on,

go on--don't mind my apparent misery--I always look

so when I am steeped in a profound and reverent joy.

Go on--she told you her age?"



"Yes, she told me her age, and all about her mother,

and her grandmother, and her other relations, and all

about herself."



"Did she volunteer these statistics?"



"No, not exactly that.  I asked the questions and she

answered them."



"This is divine.  Go on--it is not possible that you

forgot to inquire into her politics?"



"No, I thought of that.  She is a democrat, her husband

is a republican, and both of them are Baptists."



"Her husband? Is that child married?"



"She is not a child.  She is married, and that is her

husband who is there with her."



"Has she any children."



"Yes--seven and a half."



"That is impossible."



"No, she has them.  She told me herself."



"Well, but seven and a HALF? How do you make out the half?

Where does the half come in?"



"There is a child which she had by another husband

--not this one but another one--so it is a stepchild,

and they do not count in full measure."



"Another husband? Has she another husband?"



"Yes, four.  This one is number four."



"I don't believe a word of it.  It is impossible,

upon its face.  Is that boy there her brother?"



"No, that is her son.  He is her youngest.  He is not

as old as he looked; he is only eleven and a half."



"These things are all manifestly impossible.  This is a

wretched business.  It is a plain case: they simply took

your measure, and concluded to fill you up.  They seem

to have succeeded.  I am glad I am not in the mess;

they may at least be charitable enough to think there

ain't a pair of us.  Are they going to stay here long?"



"No, they leave before noon."



"There is one man who is deeply grateful for that.

How did you find out? You asked, I suppose?"



"No, along at first I inquired into their plans, in a

general way, and they said they were going to be here

a week, and make trips round about; but toward the end

of the interview, when I said you and I would tour around

with them with pleasure, and offered to bring you over

and introduce you, they hesitated a little, and asked

if you were from the same establishment that I was.

I said you were, and then they said they had changed

their mind and considered it necessary to start at once

and visit a sick relative in Siberia."



"Ah, me, you struck the summit! You struck the loftiest

altitude of stupidity that human effort has ever reached.

You shall have a monument of jackasses' skulls as high

as the Strasburg spire if you die before I do.

They wanted to know I was from the same 'establishment'

that you hailed from, did they? What did they mean by

'establishment'?"



"I don't know; it never occurred to me to ask."



"Well _I_ know-- they meant an asylum-- an IDIOT asylum,

do you understand? So they DO think there's a pair of us,

after all.  Now what do you think of yourself?"



"Well, I don't know.  I didn't know I was doing any harm;

I didn't MEAN to do any harm.  They were very nice people,

and they seemed to like me."



Harris made some rude remarks and left for his bedroom

--to break some furniture, he said.  He was a singularly

irascible man; any little thing would disturb his temper.



I had been well scorched by the young woman, but no matter,

I took it out on Harris.  One should always "get even"

in some way, else the sore place will go on hurting.







CHAPTER XXVI

[The Nest of the Cuckoo-clock]



The Hofkirche is celebrated for its organ concerts.

All summer long the tourists flock to that church about six

o'clock in the evening, and pay their franc, and listen

to the noise.  They don't stay to hear all of it, but get up

and tramp out over the sounding stone floor, meeting late

comers who tramp in in a sounding and vigorous way.

This tramping back and forth is kept up nearly all the time,

and is accented by the continuous slamming of the door,

and the coughing and barking and sneezing of the crowd.

Meantime, the big organ is booming and crashing and

thundering away, doing its best to prove that it is

the biggest and best organ in Europe, and that a tight

little box of a church is the most favorable place

to average and appreciate its powers in.  It is true,

there were some soft and merciful passages occasionally,

but the tramp-tramp of the tourists only allowed one to get

fitful glimpses of them, so to speak.  Then right away

the organist would let go another avalanche.



The commerce of Lucerne consists mainly in gimcrackery of the

souvenir sort; the shops are packed with Alpine crystals,

photographs of scenery, and wooden and ivory carvings.

I will not conceal the fact that miniature figures of the

Lion of Lucerne are to be had in them.  Millions of them.

But they are libels upon him, every one of them.

There is a subtle something about the majestic pathos

of the original which the copyist cannot get.  Even the sun

fails to get it; both the photographer and the carver give

you a dying lion, and that is all.  The shape is right,

the attitude is right, the proportions are right, but that

indescribable something which makes the Lion of Lucerne

the most mournful and moving piece of stone in the world,

is wanting.



The Lion lies in his lair in the perpendicular face of a low

cliff--for he is carved from the living rock of the cliff.

His size is colossal, his attitude is noble.  How head

is bowed, the broken spear is sticking in his shoulder,

his protecting paw rests upon the lilies of France.

Vines hang down the cliff and wave in the wind, and a clear

stream trickles from above and empties into a pond at the base,

and in the smooth surface of the pond the lion is mirrored,

among the water-lilies.



Around about are green trees and grass.  The place is

a sheltered, reposeful woodland nook, remote from noise

and stir and confusion--and all this is fitting, for lions

do die in such places, and not on granite pedestals

in public squares fenced with fancy iron railings.

The Lion of Lucerne would be impressive anywhere,

but nowhere so impressive as where he is.



Martyrdom is the luckiest fate that can befall some people.

Louis XVI did not die in his bed, consequently history is

very gentle with him; she is charitable toward his failings,

and she finds in him high virtues which are not usually

considered to be virtues when they are lodged in kings.

She makes him out to be a person with a meek and modest

spirit, the heart of a female saint, and a wrong head.

None of these qualities are kingly but the last.

Taken together they make a character which would have fared

harshly at the hands of history if its owner had had the ill

luck to miss martyrdom.  With the best intentions to do

the right thing, he always managed to do the wrong one.

Moreover, nothing could get the female saint out of him.

He knew, well enough, that in national emergencies he must

not consider how he ought to act, as a man, but how he

ought to act as a king; so he honestly tried to sink

the man and be the king--but it was a failure, he only

succeeded in being the female saint.  He was not instant

in season, but out of season.  He could not be persuaded

to do a thing while it could do any good--he was iron,

he was adamant in his stubbornness then--but as soon as

the thing had reached a point where it would be positively

harmful to do it, do it he would, and nothing could

stop him.  He did not do it because it would be harmful,

but because he hoped it was not yet too late to achieve

by it the good which it would have done if applied earlier.

His comprehension was always a train or two behindhand.

If a national toe required amputating, he could not see

that it needed anything more than poulticing; when others

saw that the mortification had reached the knee, he first

perceived that the toe needed cutting off--so he cut it off;

and he severed the leg at the knee when others saw that the

disease had reached the thigh.  He was good, and honest,

and well meaning, in the matter of chasing national diseases,

but he never could overtake one.  As a private man,

he would have been lovable; but viewed as a king, he was

strictly contemptible.



His was a most unroyal career, but the most pitiable

spectacle in it was his sentimental treachery to his

Swiss guard on that memorable 10th of August, when he

allowed those heroes to be massacred in his cause,

and forbade them to shed the "sacred French blood"

purporting to be flowing in the veins of the red-capped

mob of miscreants that was raging around the palace.

He meant to be kingly, but he was only the female saint

once more.  Some of his biographers think that upon this

occasion the spirit of Saint Louis had descended upon him.

It must have found pretty cramped quarters.  If Napoleon

the First had stood in the shoes of Louis XVI that day,

instead of being merely a casual and unknown looker-on,

there would be no Lion of Lucerne, now, but there would

be a well-stocked Communist graveyard in Paris which would

answer just as well to remember the 10th of August by.



Martyrdom made a saint of Mary Queen of Scots three

hundred years ago, and she has hardly lost all of her

saintship yet.  Martyrdom made a saint of the trivial

and foolish Marie Antoinette, and her biographers still

keep her fragrant with the odor of sanctity to this day,

while unconsciously proving upon almost every page they write

that the only calamitous instinct which her husband lacked,

she supplied--the instinct to root out and get rid of

an honest, able, and loyal official, wherever she found him.

The hideous but beneficent French Revolution would have

been deferred, or would have fallen short of completeness,

or even might not have happened at all, if Marie

Antoinette had made the unwise mistake of not being born.

The world owes a great deal to the French Revolution,

and consequently to its two chief promoters, Louis the

Poor in Spirit and his queen.



We did not buy any wooden images of the Lion, nor any ivory

or ebony or marble or chalk or sugar or chocolate ones,

or even any photographic slanders of him.  The truth is,

these copies were so common, so universal, in the shops

and everywhere, that they presently became as intolerable

to the wearied eye as the latest popular melody usually

becomes to the harassed ear.  In Lucerne, too, the wood

carvings of other sorts, which had been so pleasant to look

upon when one saw them occasionally at home, soon began

to fatigue us.  We grew very tired of seeing wooden quails

and chickens picking and strutting around clock-faces,

and still more tired of seeing wooden images of the alleged

chamois skipping about wooden rocks, or lying upon them

in family groups, or peering alertly up from behind them.

The first day, I would have bought a hundred and fifty

of these clocks if I had the money--and I did buy three

--but on the third day the disease had run its course,

I had convalesced, and was in the market once more--trying

to sell.  However, I had no luck; which was just as well,

for the things will be pretty enough, no doubt, when I get

them home.



For years my pet aversion had been the cuckoo clock;

now here I was, at last, right in the creature's home;

so wherever I went that distressing "HOO'hoo! HOO'hoo!

HOO'hoo!" was always in my ears.  For a nervous man,

this was a fine state of things.  Some sounds are hatefuler

than others, but no sound is quite so inane, and silly,

and aggravating as the "HOO'hoo" of a cuckoo clock, I think.

I bought one, and am carrying it home to a certain person;

for I have always said that if the opportunity ever happened,

I would do that man an ill turn.  What I meant, was, that I

would break one of his legs, or something of that sort;

but in Lucerne I instantly saw that I could impair his mind.

That would be more lasting, and more satisfactory every way.

So I bought the cuckoo clock; and if I ever get home

with it, he is "my meat," as they say in the mines.

I thought of another candidate--a book-reviewer whom

I could name if I wanted to--but after thinking

it over, I didn't buy him a clock.  I couldn't injure

his mind.



We visited the two long, covered wooden bridges which span

the green and brilliant Reuss just below where it goes

plunging and hurrahing out of the lake.  These rambling,

sway-backed tunnels are very attractive things, with their

alcoved outlooks upon the lovely and inspiriting water.

They contain two or three hundred queer old pictures,

by old Swiss masters--old boss sign-painters, who flourished

before the decadence of art.



The lake is alive with fishes, plainly visible to the eye,

for the water is very clear.  The parapets in front of the

hotels were usually fringed with fishers of all ages.

One day I thought I would stop and see a fish caught.

The result brought back to my mind, very forcibly,

a circumstance which I had not thought of before for

twelve years.  This one:



THE MAN WHO PUT UP AT GADSBY'S



When my odd friend Riley and I were newspaper correspondents

in Washington, in the winter of '67, we were coming down

Pennsylvania Avenue one night, near midnight, in a driving

storm of snow, when the flash of a street-lamp fell upon a man

who was eagerly tearing along in the opposite direction.

"This is lucky! You are Mr. Riley, ain't you?"



Riley was the most self-possessed and solemnly deliberate

person in the republic.  He stopped, looked his man

over from head to foot, and finally said:



"I am Mr. Riley.  Did you happen to be looking for me?"



"That's just what I was doing," said the man, joyously,

"and it's the biggest luck in the world that I've found you.

My name is Lykins.  I'm one of the teachers of the high

school--San Francisco.  As soon as I heard the San Francisco

postmastership was vacant, I made up my mind to get it--and here

I am."



"Yes," said Riley, slowly, "as you have remarked ...

Mr. Lykins ... here you are.  And have you got it?"



"Well, not exactly GOT it, but the next thing to it.

I've brought a petition, signed by the Superintendent

of Public Instruction, and all the teachers, and by more

than two hundred other people.  Now I want you, if you'll

be so good, to go around with me to the Pacific delegation,

for I want to rush this thing through and get along home."



"If the matter is so pressing, you will prefer that we

visit the delegation tonight," said Riley, in a voice

which had nothing mocking in it--to an unaccustomed ear.



"Oh, tonight, by all means! I haven't got any time to

fool around.  I want their promise before I go to bed

--I ain't the talking kind, I'm the DOING kind!"



"Yes ... you've come to the right place for that.

When did you arrive?"



"Just an hour ago."



"When are you intending to leave?"



"For New York tomorrow evening--for San Francisco

next morning."



"Just so....  What are you going to do tomorrow?"



"DO! Why, I've got to go to the President with the petition

and the delegation, and get the appointment, haven't I?"



"Yes ... very true ... that is correct.  And then what?"



"Executive session of the Senate at 2 P.M.--got to get

the appointment confirmed--I reckon you'll grant that?"



"Yes ... yes," said Riley, meditatively, "you are

right again.  Then you take the train for New York in

the evening, and the steamer for San Francisco next morning?"



"That's it--that's the way I map it out!"



Riley considered a while, and then said:



"You couldn't stay ... a day ... well, say two

days longer?"



"Bless your soul, no! It's not my style.  I ain't a man

to go fooling around--I'm a man that DOES things,

I tell you."



The storm was raging, the thick snow blowing in gusts.

Riley stood silent, apparently deep in a reverie,

during a minute or more, then he looked up and said:



"Have you ever heard about that man who put up at Gadsby's,

once? ... But I see you haven't."



He backed Mr. Lykins against an iron fence, buttonholed him,

fastened him with his eye, like the Ancient Mariner,

and proceeded to unfold his narrative as placidly

and peacefully as if we were all stretched comfortably

in a blossomy summer meadow instead of being persecuted

by a wintry midnight tempest:



"I will tell you about that man.  It was in Jackson's time.

Gadsby's was the principal hotel, then.  Well, this man

arrived from Tennessee about nine o'clock, one morning,

with a black coachman and a splendid four-horse carriage and

an elegant dog, which he was evidently fond of and proud of;

he drove up before Gadsby's, and the clerk and the landlord

and everybody rushed out to take charge of him, but he said,

'Never mind,' and jumped out and told the coachman

to wait--said he hadn't time to take anything to eat,

he only had a little claim against the government to collect,

would run across the way, to the Treasury, and fetch

the money, and then get right along back to Tennessee,

for he was in considerable of a hurry.



"Well, about eleven o'clock that night he came back

and ordered a bed and told them to put the horses

up--said he would collect the claim in the morning.

This was in January, you understand--January, 1834

--the 3d of January--Wednesday.



"Well, on the 5th of February, he sold the fine carriage,

and bought a cheap second-hand one--said it would answer

just as well to take the money home in, and he didn't care

for style.



"On the 11th of August he sold a pair of the fine horses

--said he'd often thought a pair was better than four,

to go over the rough mountain roads with where a body

had to be careful about his driving--and there wasn't

so much of his claim but he could lug the money home

with a pair easy enough.



"On the 13th of December he sold another horse--said

two warn't necessary to drag that old light vehicle

with--in fact, one could snatch it along faster than

was absolutely necessary, now that it was good solid

winter weather and the roads in splendid condition.



"On the 17th of February, 1835, he sold the old carriage

and bought a cheap second-hand buggy--said a buggy

was just the trick to skim along mushy, slushy early

spring roads with, and he had always wanted to try

a buggy on those mountain roads, anyway.



"On the 1st August he sold the buggy and bought the

remains of an old sulky--said he just wanted to see

those green Tennesseans stare and gawk when they saw

him come a-ripping along in a sulky--didn't believe

they'd ever heard of a sulky in their lives.



"Well, on the 29th of August he sold his colored

coachman--said he didn't need a coachman for a sulky

--wouldn't be room enough for two in it anyway--and,

besides, it wasn't every day that Providence sent a man

a fool who was willing to pay nine hundred dollars for

such a third-rate negro as that--been wanting to get

rid of the creature for years, but didn't like to THROW him away.





"Eighteen months later--that is to say, on the 15th

of February, 1837--he sold the sulky and bought

a saddle--said horseback-riding was what the doctor

had always recommended HIM to take, and dog'd if he

wanted to risk HIS neck going over those mountain roads

on wheels in the dead of winter, not if he knew himself.



"On the 9th of April he sold the saddle--said he wasn't

going to risk HIS life with any perishable saddle-girth

that ever was made, over a rainy, miry April road,

while he could ride bareback and know and feel he was

safe--always HAD despised to ride on a saddle, anyway.



"On the 24th of April he sold his horse--said 'I'm just

fifty-seven today, hale and hearty--it would be a PRETTY

howdy-do for me to be wasting such a trip as that and such

weather as this, on a horse, when there ain't anything

in the world so splendid as a tramp on foot through

the fresh spring woods and over the cheery mountains,

to a man that IS a man--and I can make my dog carry my

claim in a little bundle, anyway, when it's collected.

So tomorrow I'll be up bright and early, make my little

old collection, and mosey off to Tennessee, on my own

hind legs, with a rousing good-by to Gadsby's.'



"On the 22d of June he sold his dog--said 'Dern a dog,

anyway, where you're just starting off on a rattling bully

pleasure tramp through the summer woods and hills--perfect

nuisance--chases the squirrels, barks at everything,

goes a-capering and splattering around in the fords

--man can't get any chance to reflect and enjoy nature

--and I'd a blamed sight ruther carry the claim myself,

it's a mighty sight safer; a dog's mighty uncertain

in a financial way--always noticed it--well, GOOD-by,

boys--last call--I'm off for Tennessee with a good

leg and a gay heart, early in the morning.'"



There was a pause and a silence--except the noise

of the wind and the pelting snow.  Mr. Lykins said,

impatiently:



"Well?"



Riley said:



"Well,--that was thirty years ago."



"Very well, very well--what of it?"



"I'm great friends with that old patriarch.  He comes

every evening to tell me good-by. I saw him an hour ago

--he's off for Tennessee early tomorrow morning--as usual;

said he calculated to get his claim through and be off

before night-owls like me have turned out of bed.

The tears were in his eyes, he was so glad he was going

to see his old Tennessee and his friends once more."



Another silent pause.  The stranger broke it:



"Is that all?"



"That is all."



"Well, for the TIME of night, and the KIND of night,

it seems to me the story was full long enough.  But what's

it all FOR?"



"Oh, nothing in particular."



"Well, where's the point of it?"



"Oh, there isn't any particular point to it.  Only, if you

are not in TOO much of a hurry to rush off to San Francisco

with that post-office appointment, Mr. Lykins, I'd advise

you to 'PUT UP AT GADSBY'S' for a spell, and take it easy.

Good-by. GOD bless you!"



So saying, Riley blandly turned on his heel and left

the astonished school-teacher standing there, a musing

and motionless snow image shining in the broad glow

of the street-lamp.



He never got that post-office.



To go back to Lucerne and its fishers, I concluded,

after about nine hours' waiting, that the man who proposes

to tarry till he sees something hook one of those well-fed

and experienced fishes will find it wisdom to "put up

at Gadsby's" and take it easy.  It is likely that a fish

has not been caught on that lake pier for forty years;

but no matter, the patient fisher watches his cork there

all the day long, just the same, and seems to enjoy it.

One may see the fisher-loafers just as thick and contented

and happy and patient all along the Seine at Paris,

but tradition says that the only thing ever caught there

in modern times is a thing they don't fish for at all--the

recent dog and the translated cat.







CHAPTER XXVII

[I Spare an Awful Bore]



Close by the Lion of Lucerne is what they call the

"Glacier Garden"--and it is the only one in the world.

It is on high ground.  Four or five years ago,

some workmen who were digging foundations for a house

came upon this interesting relic of a long-departed age.

Scientific men perceived in it a confirmation of their

theories concerning the glacial period; so through

their persuasions the little tract of ground was bought

and permanently protected against being built upon.

The soil was removed, and there lay the rasped and guttered

track which the ancient glacier had made as it moved

along upon its slow and tedious journey.  This track

was perforated by huge pot-shaped holes in the bed-rock,

formed by the furious washing-around in them of boulders

by the turbulent torrent which flows beneath all glaciers.

These huge round boulders still remain in the holes;

they and the walls of the holes are worn smooth by

the long-continued chafing which they gave each other

in those old days.  It took a mighty force to churn

these big lumps of stone around in that vigorous way.

The neighboring country had a very different shape,

at that time--the valleys have risen up and become hills,

since, and the hills have become valleys.  The boulders

discovered in the pots had traveled a great distance,

for there is no rock like them nearer than the distant

Rhone Glacier.



For some days we were content to enjoy looking at the blue

lake Lucerne and at the piled-up masses of snow-mountains

that border it all around--an enticing spectacle,

this last, for there is a strange and fascinating beauty

and charm about a majestic snow-peak with the sun blazing

upon it or the moonlight softly enriching it--but finally

we concluded to try a bit of excursioning around on

a steamboat, and a dash on foot at the Rigi.  Very well,

we had a delightful trip to Fluelen, on a breezy, sunny day.

Everybody sat on the upper deck, on benches, under an awning;

everybody talked, laughed, and exclaimed at the wonder scenery;

in truth, a trip on that lake is almost the perfection

of pleasuring.  The mountains were a never-ceasing marvel.

Sometimes they rose straight up out of the lake,

and towered aloft and overshadowed our pygmy steamer

with their prodigious bulk in the most impressive way.

Not snow-clad mountains, these, yet they climbed high

enough toward the sky to meet the clouds and veil their

foreheads in them.  They were not barren and repulsive,

but clothed in green, and restful and pleasant to the eye.

And they were so almost straight-up-and-down, sometimes,

that one could not imagine a man being able to keep

his footing upon such a surface, yet there are paths,

and the Swiss people go up and down them every day.



Sometimes one of these monster precipices had the slight

inclination of the huge ship-houses in dockyards

--then high aloft, toward the sky, it took a little

stronger inclination, like that of a mansard roof--and

perched on this dizzy mansard one's eye detected little

things like martin boxes, and presently perceived that

these were the dwellings of peasants--an airy place

for a home, truly.  And suppose a peasant should walk

in his sleep, or his child should fall out of the front

yard?--the friends would have a tedious long journey down

out of those cloud-heights before they found the remains.

And yet those far-away homes looked ever so seductive,

they were so remote from the troubled world, they dozed

in such an atmosphere of peace and dreams--surely no one

who has learned to live up there would ever want

to live on a meaner level.



We swept through the prettiest little curving arms

of the lake, among these colossal green walls,

enjoying new delights, always, as the stately panorama

unfolded itself before us and rerolled and hid itself

behind us; and now and then we had the thrilling surprise

of bursting suddenly upon a tremendous white mass like the

distant and dominating Jungfrau, or some kindred giant,

looming head and shoulders above a tumbled waste of lesser Alps.



Once, while I was hungrily taking in one of these surprises,

and doing my best to get all I possibly could of it while it

should last, I was interrupted by a young and care-free voice:



"You're an American, I think--so'm I."



He was about eighteen, or possibly nineteen; slender and

of medium height; open, frank, happy face; a restless

but independent eye; a snub nose, which had the air

of drawing back with a decent reserve from the silky

new-born mustache below it until it should be introduced;

a loosely hung jaw, calculated to work easily in the sockets.

He wore a low-crowned, narrow-brimmed straw hat,

with a broad blue ribbon around it which had a white

anchor embroidered on it in front; nobby short-tailed

coat, pantaloons, vest, all trim and neat and up with

the fashion; red-striped stockings, very low-quarter

patent-leather shoes, tied with black ribbon; blue ribbon

around his neck, wide-open collar; tiny diamond studs;

wrinkleless kids; projecting cuffs, fastened with large

oxidized silver sleeve-buttons, bearing the device

of a dog's face--English pug.  He carries a slim cane,

surmounted with an English pug's head with red glass eyes.

Under his arm he carried a German grammar--Otto's. His hair

was short, straight, and smooth, and presently when he turned

his head a moment, I saw that it was nicely parted behind.

He took a cigarette out of a dainty box, stuck it into

a meerschaum holder which he carried in a morocco case,

and reached for my cigar.  While he was lighting, I said:



"Yes--I am an American."



"I knew it--I can always tell them.  What ship did you

come over in?"



"HOLSATIA."



"We came in the BATAVIA--Cunard, you know.  What kind

of passage did you have?"



"Tolerably rough."



"So did we.  Captain said he'd hardly ever seen it rougher.

Where are you from?"



"New England."



"So'm I. I'm from New Bloomfield.  Anybody with you?"



"Yes--a friend."



"Our whole family's along.  It's awful slow, going around

alone--don't you think so?"



"Rather slow."



"Ever been over here before?"



"Yes."



"I haven't. My first trip.  But we've been all around--Paris

and everywhere.  I'm to enter Harvard next year.

Studying German all the time, now.  Can't enter till I

know German.  I know considerable French--I get along

pretty well in Paris, or anywhere where they speak French.

What hotel are you stopping at?"



"Schweitzerhof."



"No! is that so? I never see you in the reception-room.

I go to the reception-room a good deal of the time,

because there's so many Americans there.  I make lots

of acquaintances.  I know an American as soon as I see

him--and so I speak to him and make his acquaintance.

I like to be always making acquaintances--don't you?"



"Lord, yes!"



"You see it breaks up a trip like this, first rate.

I never got bored on a trip like this, if I can

make acquaintances and have somebody to talk to.

But I think a trip like this would be an awful bore,

if a body couldn't find anybody to get acquainted with

and talk to on a trip like this.  I'm fond of talking,

ain't you?



"Passionately."



"Have you felt bored, on this trip?"



"Not all the time, part of it."



"That's it!--you see you ought to go around and get acquainted,

and talk.  That's my way.  That's the way I always do--I

just go 'round, 'round, 'round and talk, talk, talk--I

never get bored.  You been up the Rigi yet?"



"No."



"Going?"



"I think so."



"What hotel you going to stop at?"



"I don't know.  Is there more than one?"



"Three. You stop at the Schreiber--you'll find it full

of Americans.  What ship did you say you came over in?"



"CITY OF ANTWERP."



"German, I guess.  You going to Geneva?"



"Yes."



"What hotel you going to stop at?"



"Hotel de l''Ecu de G'en`eve."



"Don't you do it! No Americans there! You stop at one

of those big hotels over the bridge--they're packed

full of Americans."



"But I want to practice my Arabic."



"Good gracious, do you speak Arabic?"



"Yes--well enough to get along."



"Why, hang it, you won't get along in Geneva--THEY don't

speak Arabic, they speak French.  What hotel are you

stopping at here?"



"Hotel Pension-Beaurivage."



"Sho, you ought to stop at the Schweitzerhof.  Didn't you

know the Schweitzerhof was the best hotel in Switzerland?

--look at your Baedeker."



"Yes, I know--but I had an idea there warn't any

Americans there."



"No Americans! Why, bless your soul, it's just alive with

them! I'm in the great reception-room most all the time.

I make lots of acquaintances there.  Not as many as I did

at first, because now only the new ones stop in there

--the others go right along through.  Where are you from?"



"Arkansaw."



"Is that so? I'm from New England--New Bloomfield's my town

when I'm at home.  I'm having a mighty good time today,

ain't you?"



"Divine."



"That's what I call it.  I like this knocking around,

loose and easy, and making acquaintances and talking.

I know an American, soon as I see him; so I go and speak

to him and make his acquaintance.  I ain't ever bored,

on a trip like this, if I can make new acquaintances and talk.

I'm awful fond of talking when I can get hold of the right

kind of a person, ain't you?"



"I prefer it to any other dissipation."



"That's my notion, too.  Now some people like to take

a book and sit down and read, and read, and read, or moon

around yawping at the lake or these mountains and things,

but that ain't my way; no, sir, if they like it, let 'em do it,

I don't object; but as for me, talking's what _I_ like.

You been up the Rigi?"



"Yes."



"What hotel did you stop at?"



"Schreiber."



"That's the place!--I stopped there too.  FULL of Americans,

WASN'T it? It always is--always is.  That's what they say.

Everybody says that.  What ship did you come over in?"



"VILLE DE PARIS."



"French, I reckon.  What kind of a passage did ... excuse me

a minute, there's some Americans I haven't seen before."



And away he went.  He went uninjured, too--I had the murderous

impulse to harpoon him in the back with my alpenstock,

but as I raised the weapon the disposition left me;

I found I hadn't the heart to kill him, he was such

a joyous, innocent, good-natured numbskull.



Half an hour later I was sitting on a bench inspecting,

with strong interest, a noble monolith which we were

skimming by--a monolith not shaped by man, but by Nature's

free great hand--a massy pyramidal rock eighty feet high,

devised by Nature ten million years ago against the day

when a man worthy of it should need it for his monument.

The time came at last, and now this grand remembrancer

bears Schiller's name in huge letters upon its face.

Curiously enough, this rock was not degraded or defiled

in any way.  It is said that two years ago a stranger let

himself down from the top of it with ropes and pulleys,

and painted all over it, in blue letters bigger than those in

Schiller's name, these words:



"Try Sozodont;" "Buy Sun Stove Polish;" "Helmbold's Buchu;"

"Try Benzaline for the Blood."



He was captured and it turned out that he was an American.

Upon his trial the judge said to him:



"You are from a land where any insolent that wants to is

privileged to profane and insult Nature, and, through her,

Nature's God, if by so doing he can put a sordid penny

in his pocket.  But here the case is different.  Because you

are a foreigner and ignorant, I will make your sentence light;

if you were a native I would deal strenuously with you.

Hear and obey: --You will immediately remove every trace

of your offensive work from the Schiller monument; you pay

a fine of ten thousand francs; you will suffer two years'

imprisonment at hard labor; you will then be horsewhipped,

tarred and feathered, deprived of your ears, ridden on a

rail to the confines of the canton, and banished forever.

The severest penalties are omitted in your case--not as

a grace to you, but to that great republic which had the

misfortune to give you birth."



The steamer's benches were ranged back to back across

the deck.  My back hair was mingling innocently with

the back hair of a couple of ladies.  Presently they

were addressed by some one and I overheard this conversation:



"You are Americans, I think? So'm I."



"Yes--we are Americans."



"I knew it--I can always tell them.  What ship did you

come over in?"



"CITY OF CHESTER."



"Oh, yes--Inman line.  We came in the BATAVIA--Cunard

you know.  What kind of a passage did you have?"



"Pretty fair."



"That was luck.  We had it awful rough.  Captain said

he'd hardly seen it rougher.  Where are you from?"



"New Jersey."



"So'm I. No--I didn't mean that; I'm from New England.

New Bloomfield's my place.  These your children?--belong

to both of you?"



"Only to one of us; they are mine; my friend is not married."



"Single, I reckon? So'm I. Are you two ladies traveling alone?"



"No--my husband is with us."



"Our whole family's along.  It's awful slow, going around

alone--don't you think so?"



"I suppose it must be."



"Hi, there's Mount Pilatus coming in sight again.

Named after Pontius Pilate, you know, that shot the apple

off of William Tell's head.  Guide-book tells all about it,

they say.  I didn't read it--an American told me.  I don't

read when I'm knocking around like this, having a good time.

Did you ever see the chapel where William Tell used

to preach?"



"I did not know he ever preached there."



"Oh, yes, he did.  That American told me so.  He don't

ever shut up his guide-book. He knows more about this lake

than the fishes in it.  Besides, they CALL it 'Tell's

Chapel'--you know that yourself.  You ever been over here

before?"



"Yes."



"I haven't. It's my first trip.  But we've been all around

--Paris and everywhere.  I'm to enter Harvard next year.

Studying German all the time now.  Can't enter till I

know German.  This book's Otto's grammar.  It's a mighty

good book to get the ICH HABE GEHABT HABEN's out of.

But I don't really study when I'm knocking around this way.

If the notion takes me, I just run over my little

old ICH HABE GEHABT, DU HAST GEHABT, ER HAT GEHABT,

WIR HABEN GEHABT, IHR HABEN GEHABT, SIE HABEN GEHABT

--kind of 'Now-I-lay-me-down-to-sleep' fashion, you know,

and after that, maybe I don't buckle to it for three days.

It's awful undermining to the intellect, German is;

you want to take it in small doses, or first you know

your brains all run together, and you feel them sloshing

around in your head same as so much drawn butter.

But French is different; FRENCH ain't anything.  I ain't

any more afraid of French than a tramp's afraid of pie; I can

rattle off my little J'AI, TU AS, IL A, and the rest of it,

just as easy as a-b-c. I get along pretty well in Paris,

or anywhere where they speak French.  What hotel are you

stopping at?"



"The Schweitzerhof."



"No! is that so? I never see you in the big reception-room.

I go in there a good deal of the time, because there's

so many Americans there.  I make lots of acquaintances.

You been up the Rigi yet?"



"No."



"Going?"



"We think of it."



"What hotel you going to stop at?"



"I don't know."



"Well, then you stop at the Schreiber--it's full of Americans.

What ship did you come over in?"



"CITY OF CHESTER."



"Oh, yes, I remember I asked you that before.  But I

always ask everybody what ship they came over in, and so

sometimes I forget and ask again.  You going to Geneva?"



"Yes."



"What hotel you going to stop at?"



"We expect to stop in a pension."



"I don't hardly believe you'll like that; there's very few

Americans in the pensions.  What hotel are you stopping

at here?"



"The Schweitzerhof."



"Oh, yes.  I asked you that before, too.  But I always

ask everybody what hotel they're stopping at, and so I've

got my head all mixed up with hotels.  But it makes talk,

and I love to talk.  It refreshes me up so--don't it

you--on a trip like this?"



"Yes--sometimes."



"Well, it does me, too.  As long as I'm talking I never

feel bored--ain't that the way with you?"



"Yes--generally. But there are exception to the rule."



"Oh, of course.  _I_ don't care to talk to everybody, MYSELF.

If a person starts in to jabber-jabber-jabber about scenery,

and history, and pictures, and all sorts of tiresome things,

I get the fan-tods mighty soon.  I say 'Well, I must be going

now--hope I'll see you again'--and then I take a walk.  Where you

from?"



"New Jersey."



"Why, bother it all, I asked you THAT before, too.

Have you seen the Lion of Lucerne?"



"Not yet."



"Nor I, either.  But the man who told me about

Mount Pilatus says it's one of the things to see.

It's twenty-eight feet long.  It don't seem reasonable,

but he said so, anyway.  He saw it yesterday; said it

was dying, then, so I reckon it's dead by this time.

But that ain't any matter, of course they'll stuff it.

Did you say the children are yours--or HERS?"



"Mine."



"Oh, so you did.  Are you going up the ... no, I asked

you that.  What ship ... no, I asked you that, too.

What hotel are you ... no, you told me that.

Let me see ... um ....  Oh, what kind of voy ... no,

we've been over that ground, too.  Um ... um ... well,

I believe that is all.  BONJOUR--I am very glad to have

made your acquaintance, ladies.  GUTEN TAG."







CHAPTER XXVIII

[The Jodel and Its Native Wilds]



The Rigi-Kulm is an imposing Alpine mass, six thousand

feet high, which stands by itself, and commands a mighty

prospect of blue lakes, green valleys, and snowy mountains

--a compact and magnificent picture three hundred miles

in circumference.  The ascent is made by rail, or horseback,

or on foot, as one may prefer.  I and my agent panoplied

ourselves in walking-costume, one bright morning,

and started down the lake on the steamboat; we got ashore

at the village of Waeggis; three-quarters of an hour distant

from Lucerne.  This village is at the foot of the mountain.



We were soon tramping leisurely up the leafy mule-path,

and then the talk began to flow, as usual.  It was

twelve o'clock noon, and a breezy, cloudless day;

the ascent was gradual, and the glimpses, from under

the curtaining boughs, of blue water, and tiny sailboats,

and beetling cliffs, were as charming as glimpses of dreamland.

All the circumstances were perfect--and the anticipations,

too, for we should soon be enjoying, for the first time,

that wonderful spectacle, an Alpine sunrise--the object

of our journey.  There was (apparently) no real need

for hurry, for the guide-book made the walking-distance

from Waeggis to the summit only three hours and a quarter.

I say "apparently," because the guide-book had already

fooled us once--about the distance from Allerheiligen

to Oppenau--and for aught I knew it might be getting ready

