must likewise pronounce it?  Ha-ha!  Knew ye that?"



"Yes, I knew that, too."



"You had that knowledge!  Art a fool?  Are ye minded to utter

that name and die?"



"Utter it?  Why certainly.  I would utter it if it was Welsh."



"Ye are even a dead man, then; and I go to tell Arthur."



"That's all right.  Take your gripsack and get along.  The thing

for _you_ to do is to go home and work the weather, John W. Merlin."



It was a home shot, and it made him wince; for he was the worst

weather-failure in the kingdom.  Whenever he ordered up the

danger-signals along the coast there was a week's dead calm, sure,

and every time he prophesied fair weather it rained brickbats.

But I kept him in the weather bureau right along, to undermine

his reputation.  However, that shot raised his bile, and instead

of starting home to report my death, he said he would remain

and enjoy it.



My two experts arrived in the evening, and pretty well fagged,

for they had traveled double tides.  They had pack-mules along,

and had brought everything I needed--tools, pump, lead pipe,

Greek fire, sheaves of big rockets, roman candles, colored fire

sprays, electric apparatus, and a lot of sundries--everything

necessary for the stateliest kind of a miracle.  They got their

supper and a nap, and about midnight we sallied out through a

solitude so wholly vacant and complete that it quite overpassed

the required conditions.  We took possession of the well and its

surroundings.  My boys were experts in all sorts of things, from

the stoning up of a well to the constructing of a mathematical

instrument.  An hour before sunrise we had that leak mended in

ship-shape fashion, and the water began to rise.  Then we stowed our

fireworks in the chapel, locked up the place, and went home to bed.



Before the noon mass was over, we were at the well again; for there

was a deal to do yet, and I was determined to spring the miracle

before midnight, for business reasons: for whereas a miracle

worked for the Church on a week-day is worth a good deal, it is

worth six times as much if you get it in on a Sunday.  In nine hours

the water had risen to its customary level--that is to say, it was

within twenty-three feet of the top.  We put in a little iron pump,

one of the first turned out by my works near the capital; we bored

into a stone reservoir which stood against the outer wall of the

well-chamber and inserted a section of lead pipe that was long

enough to reach to the door of the chapel and project beyond

the threshold, where the gushing water would be visible to the

two hundred and fifty acres of people I was intending should be

present on the flat plain in front of this little holy hillock at

the proper time.



We knocked the head out of an empty hogshead and hoisted this

hogshead to the flat roof of the chapel, where we clamped it down

fast, poured in gunpowder till it lay loosely an inch deep on the

bottom, then we stood up rockets in the hogshead as thick as they

could loosely stand, all the different breeds of rockets there are;

and they made a portly and imposing sheaf, I can tell you.  We

grounded the wire of a pocket electrical battery in that powder,

we placed a whole magazine of Greek fire on each corner of the

roof--blue on one corner, green on another, red on another, and

purple on the last--and grounded a wire in each.



About two hundred yards off, in the flat, we built a pen of

scantlings, about four feet high, and laid planks on it, and so

made a platform.  We covered it with swell tapestries borrowed

for the occasion, and topped it off with the abbot's own throne.

When you are going to do a miracle for an ignorant race, you want

to get in every detail that will count; you want to make all the

properties impressive to the public eye; you want to make matters

comfortable for your head guest; then you can turn yourself loose

and play your effects for all they are worth.  I know the value of

these things, for I know human nature.  You can't throw too much

style into a miracle.  It costs trouble, and work, and sometimes

money; but it pays in the end.  Well, we brought the wires to

the ground at the chapel, and then brought them under the ground

to the platform, and hid the batteries there.  We put a rope fence

a hundred feet square around the platform to keep off the common

multitude, and that finished the work.  My idea was, doors open

at 10:30, performance to begin at 11:25 sharp.  I wished I could

charge admission, but of course that wouldn't answer.  I instructed

my boys to be in the chapel as early as 10, before anybody was

around, and be ready to man the pumps at the proper time, and

make the fur fly.  Then we went home to supper.



The news of the disaster to the well had traveled far by this time;

and now for two or three days a steady avalanche of people had

been pouring into the valley.  The lower end of the valley was

become one huge camp; we should have a good house, no question

about that.  Criers went the rounds early in the evening and

announced the coming attempt, which put every pulse up to fever

heat.  They gave notice that the abbot and his official suite would

move in state and occupy the platform at 10:30, up to which time

all the region which was under my ban must be clear; the bells

would then cease from tolling, and this sign should be permission

to the multitudes to close in and take their places.



I was at the platform and all ready to do the honors when the

abbot's solemn procession hove in sight--which it did not do till

it was nearly to the rope fence, because it was a starless black

night and no torches permitted.  With it came Merlin, and took

a front seat on the platform; he was as good as his word for once.

One could not see the multitudes banked together beyond the ban,

but they were there, just the same.  The moment the bells stopped,

those banked masses broke and poured over the line like a vast

black wave, and for as much as a half hour it continued to flow,

and then it solidified itself, and you could have walked upon

a pavement of human heads to--well, miles.



We had a solemn stage-wait, now, for about twenty minutes--a thing

I had counted on for effect; it is always good to let your audience

have a chance to work up its expectancy.  At length, out of the

silence a noble Latin chant--men's voices--broke and swelled up

and rolled away into the night, a majestic tide of melody.  I had

put that up, too, and it was one of the best effects I ever invented.

When it was finished I stood up on the platform and extended my

hands abroad, for two minutes, with my face uplifted--that always

produces a dead hush--and then slowly pronounced this ghastly word

with a kind of awfulness which caused hundreds to tremble, and

many women to faint:



"Constantinopolitanischerdudelsackspfeifenmachersgesellschafft!"



Just as I was moaning out the closing hunks of that word, I touched

off one of my electric connections and all that murky world of

people stood revealed in a hideous blue glare!  It was immense

--that effect!  Lots of people shrieked, women curled up and quit

in every direction, foundlings collapsed by platoons.  The abbot

and the monks crossed themselves nimbly and their lips fluttered

with agitated prayers.  Merlin held his grip, but he was astonished

clear down to his corns; he had never seen anything to begin

with that, before.  Now was the time to pile in the effects.  I lifted

my hands and groaned out this word--as it were in agony:



"Nihilistendynamittheaterkaestchenssprengungsattentaetsversuchungen!"



--and turned on the red fire!  You should have heard that Atlantic

of people moan and howl when that crimson hell joined the blue!

After sixty seconds I shouted:



"Transvaaltruppentropentransporttrampelthiertreibertrauungsthraenen-

tragoedie!"



--and lit up the green fire!  After waiting only forty seconds this

time, I spread my arms abroad and thundered out the devastating

syllables of this word of words:



"Mekkamuselmannenmassenmenchenmoerdermohrenmuttermarmormonumentenmacher!"



--and whirled on the purple glare!  There they were, all going

at once, red, blue, green, purple!--four furious volcanoes pouring

vast clouds of radiant smoke aloft, and spreading a blinding

rainbowed noonday to the furthest confines of that valley.  In

the distance one could see that fellow on the pillar standing rigid

against the background of sky, his seesaw stopped for the first

time in twenty years.  I knew the boys were at the pump now and

ready.  So I said to the abbot:



"The time is come, Father.  I am about to pronounce the dread name

and command the spell to dissolve.  You want to brace up, and take

hold of something."  Then I shouted to the people: "Behold, in

another minute the spell will be broken, or no mortal can break it.

If it break, all will know it, for you will see the sacred water

gush from the chapel door!"



I stood a few moments, to let the hearers have a chance to spread

my announcement to those who couldn't hear, and so convey it

to the furthest ranks, then I made a grand exhibition of extra

posturing and gesturing, and shouted:



"Lo, I command the fell spirit that possesses the holy fountain

to now disgorge into the skies all the infernal fires that still

remain in him, and straightway dissolve his spell and flee hence

to the pit, there to lie bound a thousand years.  By his own dread

name I command it--BGWJJILLIGKKK!"



Then I touched off the hogshead of rockets, and a vast fountain of

dazzling lances of fire vomited itself toward the zenith with a

hissing rush, and burst in mid-sky into a storm of flashing jewels!

One mighty groan of terror started up from the massed people

--then suddenly broke into a wild hosannah of joy--for there, fair

and plain in the uncanny glare, they saw the freed water leaping

forth!  The old abbot could not speak a word, for tears and the

chokings in his throat; without utterance of any sort, he folded me

in his arms and mashed me.  It was more eloquent than speech.

And harder to get over, too, in a country where there were really

no doctors that were worth a damaged nickel.



You should have seen those acres of people throw themselves down

in that water and kiss it; kiss it, and pet it, and fondle it, and

talk to it as if it were alive, and welcome it back with the dear

names they gave their darlings, just as if it had been a friend who

was long gone away and lost, and was come home again.  Yes, it was

pretty to see, and made me think more of them than I had done before.



I sent Merlin home on a shutter.  He had caved in and gone down

like a landslide when I pronounced that fearful name, and had

never come to since.  He never had heard that name before,--neither

had I--but to him it was the right one.  Any jumble would have

been the right one.  He admitted, afterward, that that spirit's own

mother could not have pronounced that name better than I did.

He never could understand how I survived it, and I didn't tell

him.  It is only young magicians that give away a secret like that.

Merlin spent three months working enchantments to try to find out

the deep trick of how to pronounce that name and outlive it.

But he didn't arrive.



When I started to the chapel, the populace uncovered and fell back

reverently to make a wide way for me, as if I had been some kind

of a superior being--and I was.  I was aware of that.  I took along

a night shift of monks, and taught them the mystery of the pump,

and set them to work, for it was plain that a good part of the

people out there were going to sit up with the water all night,

consequently it was but right that they should have all they wanted

of it.  To those monks that pump was a good deal of a miracle

itself, and they were full of wonder over it; and of admiration,

too, of the exceeding effectiveness of its performance.



It was a great night, an immense night.  There was reputation in it.

I could hardly get to sleep for glorying over it.







CHAPTER XXIV



A RIVAL MAGICIAN



My influence in the Valley of Holiness was something prodigious

now.  It seemed worth while to try to turn it to some valuable

account.  The thought came to me the next morning, and was suggested

by my seeing one of my knights who was in the soap line come

riding in.  According to history, the monks of this place two

centuries before had been worldly minded enough to want to wash.

It might be that there was a leaven of this unrighteousness still

remaining.  So I sounded a Brother:



"Wouldn't you like a bath?"



He shuddered at the thought--the thought of the peril of it to

the well--but he said with feeling:



"One needs not to ask that of a poor body who has not known that

blessed refreshment sith that he was a boy.  Would God I might

wash me! but it may not be, fair sir, tempt me not; it is forbidden."



And then he sighed in such a sorrowful way that I was resolved

he should have at least one layer of his real estate removed,

if it sized up my whole influence and bankrupted the pile.  So I

went to the abbot and asked for a permit for this Brother.  He

blenched at the idea--I don't mean that you could see him blench,

for of course you couldn't see it without you scraped him, and

I didn't care enough about it to scrape him, but I knew the blench

was there, just the same, and within a book-cover's thickness of

the surface, too--blenched, and trembled.  He said:



"Ah, son, ask aught else thou wilt, and it is thine, and freely

granted out of a grateful heart--but this, oh, this!  Would you

drive away the blessed water again?"



"No, Father, I will not drive it away.  I have mysterious knowledge

which teaches me that there was an error that other time when

it was thought the institution of the bath banished the fountain."

A large interest began to show up in the old man's face.  "My

knowledge informs me that the bath was innocent of that misfortune,

which was caused by quite another sort of sin."



"These are brave words--but--but right welcome, if they be true."



"They are true, indeed.  Let me build the bath again, Father.

Let me build it again, and the fountain shall flow forever."



"You promise this?--you promise it?  Say the word--say you promise it!"



"I do promise it."



"Then will I have the first bath myself!  Go--get ye to your work.

Tarry not, tarry not, but go."



I and my boys were at work, straight off.  The ruins of the old

bath were there yet in the basement of the monastery, not a stone

missing.  They had been left just so, all these lifetimes, and

avoided with a pious fear, as things accursed.  In two days we

had it all done and the water in--a spacious pool of clear pure

water that a body could swim in.  It was running water, too.

It came in, and went out, through the ancient pipes.  The old abbot

kept his word, and was the first to try it.  He went down black

and shaky, leaving the whole black community above troubled and

worried and full of bodings; but he came back white and joyful,

and the game was made! another triumph scored.



It was a good campaign that we made in that Valley of Holiness,

and I was very well satisfied, and ready to move on now, but

I struck a disappointment.  I caught a heavy cold, and it started

up an old lurking rheumatism of mine.  Of course the rheumatism

hunted up my weakest place and located itself there.  This was

the place where the abbot put his arms about me and mashed me, what

time he was moved to testify his gratitude to me with an embrace.



When at last I got out, I was a shadow.  But everybody was full

of attentions and kindnesses, and these brought cheer back into

my life, and were the right medicine to help a convalescent swiftly

up toward health and strength again; so I gained fast.



Sandy was worn out with nursing; so I made up my mind to turn out

and go a cruise alone, leaving her at the nunnery to rest up.

My idea was to disguise myself as a freeman of peasant degree

and wander through the country a week or two on foot.  This would

give me a chance to eat and lodge with the lowliest and poorest

class of free citizens on equal terms.  There was no other way

to inform myself perfectly of their everyday life and the operation

of the laws upon it.  If I went among them as a gentleman, there

would be restraints and conventionalities which would shut me out

from their private joys and troubles, and I should get no further

than the outside shell.



One morning I was out on a long walk to get up muscle for my trip,

and had climbed the ridge which bordered the northern extremity

of the valley, when I came upon an artificial opening in the face

of a low precipice, and recognized it by its location as a hermitage

which had often been pointed out to me from a distance as the den

of a hermit of high renown for dirt and austerity.  I knew he had

lately been offered a situation in the Great Sahara, where lions

and sandflies made the hermit-life peculiarly attractive and

difficult, and had gone to Africa to take possession, so I thought

I would look in and see how the atmosphere of this den agreed

with its reputation.



My surprise was great: the place was newly swept and scoured.

Then there was another surprise.  Back in the gloom of the cavern

I heard the clink of a little bell, and then this exclamation:



"Hello Central!  Is this you, Camelot?--Behold, thou mayst glad

thy heart an thou hast faith to believe the wonderful when that

it cometh in unexpected guise and maketh itself manifest in

impossible places--here standeth in the flesh his mightiness

The Boss, and with thine own ears shall ye hear him speak!"



Now what a radical reversal of things this was; what a jumbling

together of extravagant incongruities; what a fantastic conjunction

of opposites and irreconcilables--the home of the bogus miracle

become the home of a real one, the den of a mediaeval hermit turned

into a telephone office!



The telephone clerk stepped into the light, and I recognized one

of my young fellows.  I said:



"How long has this office been established here, Ulfius?"



"But since midnight, fair Sir Boss, an it please you.  We saw many

lights in the valley, and so judged it well to make a station,

for that where so many lights be needs must they indicate a town

of goodly size."



"Quite right.  It isn't a town in the customary sense, but it's

a good stand, anyway.  Do you know where you are?"



"Of that I have had no time to make inquiry; for whenas my

comradeship moved hence upon their labors, leaving me in charge,

I got me to needed rest, purposing to inquire when I waked, and

report the place's name to Camelot for record."



"Well, this is the Valley of Holiness."



It didn't take; I mean, he didn't start at the name, as I had

supposed he would.  He merely said:



"I will so report it."



"Why, the surrounding regions are filled with the noise of late

wonders that have happened here!  You didn't hear of them?"



"Ah, ye will remember we move by night, and avoid speech with all.

We learn naught but that we get by the telephone from Camelot."



"Why _they_ know all about this thing.  Haven't they told you anything

about the great miracle of the restoration of a holy fountain?"



"Oh, _that_?  Indeed yes.  But the name of _this_ valley doth woundily

differ from the name of _that_ one; indeed to differ wider were not pos--"



"What was that name, then?"



"The Valley of Hellishness."



"_That_ explains it.  Confound a telephone, anyway.  It is the very

demon for conveying similarities of sound that are miracles of

divergence from similarity of sense.  But no matter, you know

the name of the place now.  Call up Camelot."



He did it, and had Clarence sent for.  It was good to hear my boy's

voice again.  It was like being home.  After some affectionate

interchanges, and some account of my late illness, I said:



"What is new?"



"The king and queen and many of the court do start even in this

hour, to go to your valley to pay pious homage to the waters ye

have restored, and cleanse themselves of sin, and see the place

where the infernal spirit spouted true hell-flames to the clouds

--an ye listen sharply ye may hear me wink and hear me likewise

smile a smile, sith 'twas I that made selection of those flames

from out our stock and sent them by your order."



"Does the king know the way to this place?"



"The king?--no, nor to any other in his realms, mayhap; but the lads

that holp you with your miracle will be his guide and lead the way,

and appoint the places for rests at noons and sleeps at night."



"This will bring them here--when?"



"Mid-afternoon, or later, the third day."



"Anything else in the way of news?"



"The king hath begun the raising of the standing army ye suggested

to him; one regiment is complete and officered."



"The mischief!  I wanted a main hand in that myself.  There is

only one body of men in the kingdom that are fitted to officer

a regular army."



"Yes--and now ye will marvel to know there's not so much as one

West Pointer in that regiment."



"What are you talking about?  Are you in earnest?"



"It is truly as I have said."



"Why, this makes me uneasy.  Who were chosen, and what was the

method?  Competitive examination?"



"Indeed, I know naught of the method.  I but know this--these

officers be all of noble family, and are born--what is it you

call it?--chuckleheads."



"There's something wrong, Clarence."



"Comfort yourself, then; for two candidates for a lieutenancy do

travel hence with the king--young nobles both--and if you but wait

where you are you will hear them questioned."



"That is news to the purpose.  I will get one West Pointer in,

anyway.  Mount a man and send him to that school with a message;

let him kill horses, if necessary, but he must be there before

sunset to-night and say--"



"There is no need.  I have laid a ground wire to the school.

Prithee let me connect you with it."



It sounded good!  In this atmosphere of telephones and lightning

communication with distant regions, I was breathing the breath

of life again after long suffocation.  I realized, then, what a

creepy, dull, inanimate horror this land had been to me all these

years, and how I had been in such a stifled condition of mind as

to have grown used to it almost beyond the power to notice it.



I gave my order to the superintendent of the Academy personally.

I also asked him to bring me some paper and a fountain pen and

a box or so of safety matches.  I was getting tired of doing

without these conveniences.  I could have them now, as I wasn't

going to wear armor any more at present, and therefore could get

at my pockets.



When I got back to the monastery, I found a thing of interest

going on.  The abbot and his monks were assembled in the great

hall, observing with childish wonder and faith the performances

of a new magician, a fresh arrival.  His dress was the extreme of

the fantastic; as showy and foolish as the sort of thing an Indian

medicine-man wears.  He was mowing, and mumbling, and gesticulating,

and drawing mystical figures in the air and on the floor,--the

regular thing, you know.  He was a celebrity from Asia--so he

said, and that was enough.  That sort of evidence was as good

as gold, and passed current everywhere.



How easy and cheap it was to be a great magician on this fellow's

terms.  His specialty was to tell you what any individual on the

face of the globe was doing at the moment; and what he had done

at any time in the past, and what he would do at any time in the

future.  He asked if any would like to know what the Emperor of

the East was doing now?  The sparkling eyes and the delighted rubbing

of hands made eloquent answer--this reverend crowd _would_ like to

know what that monarch was at, just as this moment.  The fraud

went through some more mummery, and then made grave announcement:



"The high and mighty Emperor of the East doth at this moment put

money in the palm of a holy begging friar--one, two, three pieces,

and they be all of silver."



A buzz of admiring exclamations broke out, all around:



"It is marvelous!"  "Wonderful!"  "What study, what labor, to have

acquired a so amazing power as this!"



Would they like to know what the Supreme Lord of Inde was doing?

Yes.  He told them what the Supreme Lord of Inde was doing.  Then

he told them what the Sultan of Egypt was at; also what the King

of the Remote Seas was about.  And so on and so on; and with each

new marvel the astonishment at his accuracy rose higher and higher.

They thought he must surely strike an uncertain place some time;

but no, he never had to hesitate, he always knew, and always with

unerring precision.  I saw that if this thing went on I should lose

my supremacy, this fellow would capture my following, I should

be left out in the cold.  I must put a cog in his wheel, and do it

right away, too.  I said:



"If I might ask, I should very greatly like to know what a certain

person is doing."



"Speak, and freely.  I will tell you."



"It will be difficult--perhaps impossible."



"My art knoweth not that word.  The more difficult it is, the more

certainly will I reveal it to you."



You see, I was working up the interest.  It was getting pretty

high, too; you could see that by the craning necks all around,

and the half-suspended breathing.  So now I climaxed it:



"If you make no mistake--if you tell me truly what I want to

know--I will give you two hundred silver pennies."



"The fortune is mine!  I will tell you what you would know."



"Then tell me what I am doing with my right hand."



"Ah-h!"  There was a general gasp of surprise.  It had not occurred

to anybody in the crowd--that simple trick of inquiring about

somebody who wasn't ten thousand miles away.  The magician was

hit hard; it was an emergency that had never happened in his

experience before, and it corked him; he didn't know how to meet

it.  He looked stunned, confused; he couldn't say a word.  "Come,"

I said, "what are you waiting for?  Is it possible you can answer up,

right off, and tell what anybody on the other side of the earth is

doing, and yet can't tell what a person is doing who isn't three

yards from you?  Persons behind me know what I am doing with my

right hand--they will indorse you if you tell correctly."  He was

still dumb.  "Very well, I'll tell you why you don't speak up and

tell; it is because you don't know.  _You_ a magician!  Good friends,

this tramp is a mere fraud and liar."



This distressed the monks and terrified them.  They were not used

to hearing these awful beings called names, and they did not know

what might be the consequence.  There was a dead silence now;

superstitious bodings were in every mind.  The magician began to

pull his wits together, and when he presently smiled an easy,

nonchalant smile, it spread a mighty relief around; for it indicated

that his mood was not destructive.  He said:



"It hath struck me speechless, the frivolity of this person's

speech.  Let all know, if perchance there be any who know it not,

that enchanters of my degree deign not to concern themselves with

the doings of any but kings, princes, emperors, them that be born

in the purple and them only.  Had ye asked me what Arthur the great

king is doing, it were another matter, and I had told ye; but the

doings of a subject interest me not."



"Oh, I misunderstood you.  I thought you said 'anybody,' and so

I supposed 'anybody' included--well, anybody; that is, everybody."



"It doth--anybody that is of lofty birth; and the better if

he be royal."



"That, it meseemeth, might well be," said the abbot, who saw his

opportunity to smooth things and avert disaster, "for it were not

likely that so wonderful a gift as this would be conferred for

the revelation of the concerns of lesser beings than such as be

born near to the summits of greatness.  Our Arthur the king--"



"Would you know of him?" broke in the enchanter.



"Most gladly, yea, and gratefully."



Everybody was full of awe and interest again right away, the

incorrigible idiots.  They watched the incantations absorbingly,

and looked at me with a "There, now, what can you say to that?"

air, when the announcement came:



"The king is weary with the chase, and lieth in his palace these

two hours sleeping a dreamless sleep."



"God's benison upon him!" said the abbot, and crossed himself;

"may that sleep be to the refreshment of his body and his soul."



"And so it might be, if he were sleeping," I said, "but the king

is not sleeping, the king rides."



Here was trouble again--a conflict of authority.  Nobody knew which

of us to believe; I still had some reputation left.  The magician's

scorn was stirred, and he said:



"Lo, I have seen many wonderful soothsayers and prophets and

magicians in my life days, but none before that could sit idle and

see to the heart of things with never an incantation to help."



"You have lived in the woods, and lost much by it.  I use incantations

myself, as this good brotherhood are aware--but only on occasions

of moment."



When it comes to sarcasming, I reckon I know how to keep my end up.

That jab made this fellow squirm.  The abbot inquired after the

queen and the court, and got this information:



"They be all on sleep, being overcome by fatigue, like as to the king."



I said:



"That is merely another lie.  Half of them are about their amusements,

the queen and the other half are not sleeping, they ride.  Now

perhaps you can spread yourself a little, and tell us where the king

and queen and all that are this moment riding with them are going?"



"They sleep now, as I said; but on the morrow they will ride,

for they go a journey toward the sea."



"And where will they be the day after to-morrow at vespers?"



"Far to the north of Camelot, and half their journey will be done."



"That is another lie, by the space of a hundred and fifty miles.

Their journey will not be merely half done, it will be all done,

and they will be _here_, in this valley."



_That_ was a noble shot!  It set the abbot and the monks in a whirl

of excitement, and it rocked the enchanter to his base.  I followed

the thing right up:



"If the king does not arrive, I will have myself ridden on a rail:

if he does I will ride you on a rail instead."



Next day I went up to the telephone office and found that the king

had passed through two towns that were on the line.  I spotted

his progress on the succeeding day in the same way.  I kept these

matters to myself.  The third day's reports showed that if he

kept up his gait he would arrive by four in the afternoon.  There

was still no sign anywhere of interest in his coming; there seemed

to be no preparations making to receive him in state; a strange

thing, truly.  Only one thing could explain this: that other

magician had been cutting under me, sure.  This was true.  I asked

a friend of mine, a monk, about it, and he said, yes, the magician

had tried some further enchantments and found out that the court

had concluded to make no journey at all, but stay at home.  Think

of that!  Observe how much a reputation was worth in such a country.

These people had seen me do the very showiest bit of magic in

history, and the only one within their memory that had a positive

value, and yet here they were, ready to take up with an adventurer

who could offer no evidence of his powers but his mere unproven word.



However, it was not good politics to let the king come without

any fuss and feathers at all, so I went down and drummed up a

procession of pilgrims and smoked out a batch of hermits and

started them out at two o'clock to meet him.  And that was the

sort of state he arrived in.  The abbot was helpless with rage

and humiliation when I brought him out on a balcony and showed

him the head of the state marching in and never a monk on hand to

offer him welcome, and no stir of life or clang of joy-bell to glad

his spirit.  He took one look and then flew to rouse out his forces.

The next minute the bells were dinning furiously, and the various

buildings were vomiting monks and nuns, who went swarming in a

rush toward the coming procession; and with them went that magician

--and he was on a rail, too, by the abbot's order; and his reputation

was in the mud, and mine was in the sky again.  Yes, a man can

keep his trademark current in such a country, but he can't sit

around and do it; he has got to be on deck and attending to business

right along.







CHAPTER XXV



A COMPETITIVE EXAMINATION



When the king traveled for change of air, or made a progress, or

visited a distant noble whom he wished to bankrupt with the cost

of his keep, part of the administration moved with him.  It was

a fashion of the time.  The Commission charged with the examination

of candidates for posts in the army came with the king to the

Valley, whereas they could have transacted their business just

as well at home.  And although this expedition was strictly a

holiday excursion for the king, he kept some of his business

functions going just the same.  He touched for the evil, as usual;

he held court in the gate at sunrise and tried cases, for he was

himself Chief Justice of the King's Bench.



He shone very well in this latter office.  He was a wise and humane

judge, and he clearly did his honest best and fairest,--according

to his lights.  That is a large reservation.  His lights--I mean

his rearing--often colored his decisions.  Whenever there was a

dispute between a noble or gentleman and a person of lower degree,

the king's leanings and sympathies were for the former class always,

whether he suspected it or not.  It was impossible that this should

be otherwise.  The blunting effects of slavery upon the slaveholder's

moral perceptions are known and conceded, the world over; and a

privileged class, an aristocracy, is but a band of slaveholders

under another name.  This has a harsh sound, and yet should not

be offensive to any--even to the noble himself--unless the fact

itself be an offense: for the statement simply formulates a fact.

The repulsive feature of slavery is the _thing_, not its name.  One

needs but to hear an aristocrat speak of the classes that are below

him to recognize--and in but indifferently modified measure

--the very air and tone of the actual slaveholder; and behind these

are the slaveholder's spirit, the slaveholder's blunted feeling.

They are the result of the same cause in both cases: the possessor's

old and inbred custom of regarding himself as a superior being.

The king's judgments wrought frequent injustices, but it was merely

the fault of his training, his natural and unalterable sympathies.

He was as unfitted for a judgeship as would be the average mother

for the position of milk-distributor to starving children in

famine-time; her own children would fare a shade better than the rest.



One very curious case came before the king.  A young girl, an

orphan, who had a considerable estate, married a fine young fellow

who had nothing.  The girl's property was within a seigniory held

by the Church.  The bishop of the diocese, an arrogant scion of

the great nobility, claimed the girl's estate on the ground that

she had married privately, and thus had cheated the Church out

of one of its rights as lord of the seigniory--the one heretofore

referred to as le droit du seigneur.  The penalty of refusal or

avoidance was confiscation.  The girl's defense was, that the

lordship of the seigniory was vested in the bishop, and the

particular right here involved was not transferable, but must be

exercised by the lord himself or stand vacated; and that an older

law, of the Church itself, strictly barred the bishop from exercising

it.  It was a very odd case, indeed.



It reminded me of something I had read in my youth about the

ingenious way in which the aldermen of London raised the money

that built the Mansion House.  A person who had not taken the

Sacrament according to the Anglican rite could not stand as a

candidate for sheriff of London.  Thus Dissenters were ineligible;

they could not run if asked, they could not serve if elected.

The aldermen, who without any question were Yankees in disguise,

hit upon this neat device: they passed a by-law imposing a fine

of L400 upon any one who should refuse to be a candidate for

sheriff, and a fine of L600 upon any person who, after being

elected sheriff, refused to serve.  Then they went to work and

elected a lot of Dissenters, one after another, and kept it up

until they had collected L15,000 in fines; and there stands the

stately Mansion House to this day, to keep the blushing citizen

in mind of a long past and lamented day when a band of Yankees

slipped into London and played games of the sort that has given

their race a unique and shady reputation among all truly good

and holy peoples that be in the earth.



The girl's case seemed strong to me; the bishop's case was just

as strong.  I did not see how the king was going to get out of

this hole.  But he got out.  I append his decision:



"Truly I find small difficulty here, the matter being even a

child's affair for simpleness.  An the young bride had conveyed

notice, as in duty bound, to her feudal lord and proper master

and protector the bishop, she had suffered no loss, for the said

bishop could have got a dispensation making him, for temporary

conveniency, eligible to the exercise of his said right, and thus

would she have kept all she had.  Whereas, failing in her first

duty, she hath by that failure failed in all; for whoso, clinging

to a rope, severeth it above his hands, must fall; it being no

defense to claim that the rest of the rope is sound, neither any

deliverance from his peril, as he shall find.  Pardy, the woman's

case is rotten at the source.  It is the decree of the court that

she forfeit to the said lord bishop all her goods, even to the

last farthing that she doth possess, and be thereto mulcted in

the costs.  Next!"



Here was a tragic end to a beautiful honeymoon not yet three months

old.  Poor young creatures!  They had lived these three months

lapped to the lips in worldly comforts.  These clothes and trinkets

they were wearing were as fine and dainty as the shrewdest stretch

of the sumptuary laws allowed to people of their degree; and in

these pretty clothes, she crying on his shoulder, and he trying

to comfort her with hopeful words set to the music of despair,

they went from the judgment seat out into the world homeless,

bedless, breadless; why, the very beggars by the roadsides were

not so poor as they.



Well, the king was out of the hole; and on terms satisfactory to

the Church and the rest of the aristocracy, no doubt.  Men write

many fine and plausible arguments in support of monarchy, but

the fact remains that where every man in a State has a vote, brutal

laws are impossible.  Arthur's people were of course poor material

for a republic, because they had been debased so long by monarchy;

and yet even they would have been intelligent enough to make short

work of that law which the king had just been administering if it

had been submitted to their full and free vote.  There is a phrase

which has grown so common in the world's mouth that it has come

to seem to have sense and meaning--the sense and meaning implied

when it is used; that is the phrase which refers to this or that or

the other nation as possibly being "capable of self-government";

and the implied sense of it is, that there has been a nation

somewhere, some time or other which _wasn't_ capable of it--wasn't as

able to govern itself as some self-appointed specialists were or

would be to govern it.  The master minds of all nations, in all

ages, have sprung in affluent multitude from the mass of the nation,

and from the mass of the nation only--not from its privileged

classes; and so, no matter what the nation's intellectual grade

was; whether high or low, the bulk of its ability was in the long

ranks of its nameless and its poor, and so it never saw the day

that it had not the material in abundance whereby to govern itself.

Which is to assert an always self-proven fact: that even the best

governed and most free and most enlightened monarchy is still

behind the best condition attainable by its people; and that the

same is true of kindred governments of lower grades, all the way

down to the lowest.



King Arthur had hurried up the army business altogether beyond

my calculations.  I had not supposed he would move in the matter

while I was away; and so I had not mapped out a scheme for determining

the merits of officers; I had only remarked that it would be wise

to submit every candidate to a sharp and searching examination;

and privately I meant to put together a list of military qualifications

that nobody could answer to but my West Pointers.  That ought

to have been attended to before I left; for the king was so taken

with the idea of a standing army that he couldn't wait but must

get about it at once, and get up as good a scheme of examination

as he could invent out of his own head.



I was impatient to see what this was; and to show, too, how much

more admirable was the one which I should display to the Examining

Board.  I intimated this, gently, to the king, and it fired his

curiosity.  When the Board was assembled, I followed him in; and

behind us came the candidates.  One of these candidates was a bright

young West Pointer of mine, and with him were a couple of my

West Point professors.



When I saw the Board, I did not know whether to cry or to laugh.

The head of it was the officer known to later centuries as Norroy

King-at-Arms!  The two other members were chiefs of bureaus in

his department; and all three were priests, of course; all officials

who had to know how to read and write were priests.



My candidate was called first, out of courtesy to me, and the head

of the Board opened on him with official solemnity:



"Name?"



"Mal-ease."



"Son of?"



"Webster."



"Webster--Webster.  H'm--I--my memory faileth to recall the

name.  Condition?"



"Weaver."



"Weaver!--God keep us!"



The king was staggered, from his summit to his foundations; one

clerk fainted, and the others came near it.  The chairman pulled

himself together, and said indignantly:



"It is sufficient.  Get you hence."



But I appealed to the king.  I begged that my candidate might be

examined.  The king was willing, but the Board, who were all

well-born folk, implored the king to spare them the indignity of

examining the weaver's son.  I knew they didn't know enough to

examine him anyway, so I joined my prayers to theirs and the king

turned the duty over to my professors.  I had had a blackboard

prepared, and it was put up now, and the circus began.  It was

beautiful to hear the lad lay out the science of war, and wallow

in details of battle and siege, of supply, transportation, mining

and countermining, grand tactics, big strategy and little strategy,

signal service, infantry, cavalry, artillery, and all about siege

guns, field guns, gatling guns, rifled guns, smooth bores, musket

practice, revolver practice--and not a solitary word of it all

could these catfish make head or tail of, you understand--and it

was handsome to see him chalk off mathematical nightmares on the

blackboard that would stump the angels themselves, and do it like

nothing, too--all about eclipses, and comets, and solstices, and

constellations, and mean time, and sidereal time, and dinner time,

and bedtime, and every other imaginable thing above the clouds or

under them that you could harry or bullyrag an enemy with and make

him wish he hadn't come--and when the boy made his military salute

and stood aside at last, I was proud enough to hug him, and all

those other people were so dazed they looked partly petrified,

partly drunk, and wholly caught out and snowed under.  I judged

that the cake was ours, and by a large majority.



Education is a great thing.  This was the same youth who had come

to West Point so ignorant that when I asked him, "If a general

officer should have a horse shot under him on the field of battle,

what ought he to do?" answered up naively and said:



"Get up and brush himself."



One of the young nobles was called up now.  I thought I would

question him a little myself.  I said:



"Can your lordship read?"



His face flushed indignantly, and he fired this at me:



"Takest me for a clerk?  I trow I am not of a blood that--"



"Answer the question!"



He crowded his wrath down and made out to answer "No."



"Can you write?"



He wanted to resent this, too, but I said:



"You will confine yourself to the questions, and make no comments.

You are not here to air your blood or your graces, and nothing

of the sort will be permitted.  Can you write?"



"No."



"Do you know the multiplication table?"



"I wit not what ye refer to."



"How much is 9 times 6?"



"It is a mystery that is hidden from me by reason that the emergency

requiring the fathoming of it hath not in my life-days occurred,

and so, not having no need to know this thing, I abide barren

of the knowledge."



"If A trade a barrel of onions to B, worth 2 pence the bushel,

in exchange for a sheep worth 4 pence and a dog worth a penny,

and C kill the dog before delivery, because bitten by the same,

who mistook him for D, what sum is still due to A from B, and

which party pays for the dog, C or D, and who gets the money?

If A, is the penny sufficient, or may he claim consequential damages

in the form of additional money to represent the possible profit

which might have inured from the dog, and classifiable as earned

increment, that is to say, usufruct?"



"Verily, in the all-wise and unknowable providence of God, who

moveth in mysterious ways his wonders to perform, have I never

heard the fellow to this question for confusion of the mind and

congestion of the ducts of thought.  Wherefore I beseech you let

the dog and the onions and these people of the strange and godless

names work out their several salvations from their piteous and

wonderful difficulties without help of mine, for indeed their

trouble is sufficient as it is, whereas an I tried to help I should

but damage their cause the more and yet mayhap not live myself

to see the desolation wrought."



"What do you know of the laws of attraction and gravitation?"



"If there be such, mayhap his grace the king did promulgate them

whilst that I lay sick about the beginning of the year and thereby

failed to hear his proclamation."



"What do you know of the science of optics?"



"I know of governors of places, and seneschals of castles, and

sheriffs of counties, and many like small offices and titles of

honor, but him you call the Science of Optics I have not heard

of before; peradventure it is a new dignity."



"Yes, in this country."



Try to conceive of this mollusk gravely applying for an official

position, of any kind under the sun!  Why, he had all the earmarks

of a typewriter copyist, if you leave out the disposition to

contribute uninvited emendations of your grammar and punctuation.

It was unaccountable that he didn't attempt a little help of that

sort out of his majestic supply of incapacity for the job.  But that

didn't prove that he hadn't material in him for the disposition,

it only proved that he wasn't a typewriter copyist yet.  After

nagging him a little more, I let the professors loose on him and

they turned him inside out, on the line of scientific war, and

found him empty, of course.  He knew somewhat about the warfare

of the time--bushwhacking around for ogres, and bull-fights in

the tournament ring, and such things--but otherwise he was empty

and useless.  Then we took the other young noble in hand, and he

was the first one's twin, for ignorance and incapacity.  I delivered

them into the hands of the chairman of the Board with the comfortable

consciousness that their cake was dough.  They were examined in

the previous order of precedence.



"Name, so please you?"



"Pertipole, son of Sir Pertipole, Baron of Barley Mash."



"Grandfather?"



"Also Sir Pertipole, Baron of Barley Mash."



"Great-grandfather?"



"The same name and title."



"Great-great-grandfather?"



"We had none, worshipful sir, the line failing before it had

reached so far back."



"It mattereth not.  It is a good four generations, and fulfilleth

the requirements of the rule."



"Fulfills what rule?" I asked.



"The rule requiring four generations of nobility or else the

candidate is not eligible."



"A man not eligible for a lieutenancy in the army unless he can

prove four generations of noble descent?"



"Even so; neither lieutenant nor any other officer may be commissioned

without that qualification."



"Oh, come, this is an astonishing thing.  What good is such a

qualification as that?"



"What good?  It is a hardy question, fair sir and Boss, since it doth

go far to impugn the wisdom of even our holy Mother Church herself."



"As how?"



"For that she hath established the self-same rule regarding

saints.  By her law none may be canonized until he hath lain dead

four generations."



"I see, I see--it is the same thing.  It is wonderful.  In the one

case a man lies dead-alive four generations--mummified in ignorance

and sloth--and that qualifies him to command live people, and take

their weal and woe into his impotent hands; and in the other case,

a man lies bedded with death and worms four generations, and that

qualifies him for office in the celestial camp.  Does the king's

grace approve of this strange law?"



The king said:



"Why, truly I see naught about it that is strange.  All places of

honor and of profit do belong, by natural right, to them that be

of noble blood, and so these dignities in the army are their

property and would be so without this or any rule.  The rule is

but to mark a limit.  Its purpose is to keep out too recent blood,

which would bring into contempt these offices, and men of lofty

lineage would turn their backs and scorn to take them.  I were

to blame an I permitted this calamity.  _You_ can permit it an you

are minded so to do, for you have the delegated authority, but

that the king should do it were a most strange madness and not

comprehensible to any."



"I yield.  Proceed, sir Chief of the Herald's College."



The chairman resumed as follows:



"By what illustrious achievement for the honor of the Throne and

State did the founder of your great line lift himself to the

sacred dignity of the British nobility?"



"He built a brewery."



"Sire, the Board finds this candidate perfect in all the requirements

and qualifications for military command, and doth hold his case

open for decision after due examination of his competitor."



The competitor came forward and proved exactly four generations

of nobility himself.  So there was a tie in military qualifications

that far.



He stood aside a moment, and Sir Pertipole was questioned further:



"Of what condition was the wife of the founder of your line?"



"She came of the highest landed gentry, yet she was not noble;

she was gracious and pure and charitable, of a blameless life and

character, insomuch that in these regards was she peer of the

best lady in the land."



"That will do.  Stand down."  He called up the competing lordling

again, and asked: "What was the rank and condition of the

great-grandmother who conferred British nobility upon your

great house?"



"She was a king's leman and did climb to that splendid eminence

by her own unholpen merit from the sewer where she was born."



"Ah, this, indeed, is true nobility, this is the right and perfect

intermixture.  The lieutenancy is yours, fair lord.  Hold it not in

contempt; it is the humble step which will lead to grandeurs more

worthy of the splendor of an origin like to thine."



I was down in the bottomless pit of humiliation.  I had promised

myself an easy and zenith-scouring triumph, and this was the outcome!



I was almost ashamed to look my poor disappointed cadet in the

face.  I told him to go home and be patient, this wasn't the end.



I had a private audience with the king, and made a proposition.

I said it was quite right to officer that regiment with nobilities,

and he couldn't have done a wiser thing.  It would also be a good

idea to add five hundred officers to it; in fact, add as many

officers as there were nobles and relatives of nobles in the

country, even if there should finally be five times as many officers

as privates in it; and thus make it the crack regiment, the envied

regiment, the King's Own regiment, and entitled to fight on its

own hook and in its own way, and go whither it would and come

when it pleased, in time of war, and be utterly swell and independent.

This would make that regiment the heart's desire of all the

nobility, and they would all be satisfied and happy.  Then we

would make up the rest of the standing army out of commonplace

materials, and officer it with nobodies, as was proper--nobodies

selected on a basis of mere efficiency--and we would make this

regiment toe the line, allow it no aristocratic freedom from

restraint, and force it to do all the work and persistent hammering,

to the end that whenever the King's Own was tired and wanted to go

off for a change and rummage around amongst ogres and have a good

time, it could go without uneasiness, knowing that matters were in

safe hands behind it, and business going to be continued at the

old stand, same as usual.  The king was charmed with the idea.



When I noticed that, it gave me a valuable notion.  I thought

I saw my way out of an old and stubborn difficulty at last.  You

see, the royalties of the Pendragon stock were a long-lived race

and very fruitful.  Whenever a child was born to any of these

--and it was pretty often--there was wild joy in the nation's mouth,

and piteous sorrow in the nation's heart.  The joy was questionable,

but the grief was honest.  Because the event meant another call

for a Royal Grant.  Long was the list of these royalties, and

they were a heavy and steadily increasing burden upon the treasury

and a menace to the crown.  Yet Arthur could not believe this

latter fact, and he would not listen to any of my various projects

for substituting something in the place of the royal grants.  If I

could have persuaded him to now and then provide a support for

one of these outlying scions from his own pocket, I could have

made a grand to-do over it, and it would have had a good effect

with the nation; but no, he wouldn't hear of such a thing.  He had

something like a religious passion for royal grant; he seemed to

look upon it as a sort of sacred swag, and one could not irritate

him in any way so quickly and so surely as by an attack upon that

venerable institution.  If I ventured to cautiously hint that there

was not another respectable family in England that would humble

itself to hold out the hat--however, that is as far as I ever got;

he always cut me short there, and peremptorily, too.



But I believed I saw my chance at last.  I would form this crack

regiment out of officers alone--not a single private.  Half of it

should consist of nobles, who should fill all the places up to

Major-General, and serve gratis and pay their own expenses; and

they would be glad to do this when they should learn that the rest

of the regiment would consist exclusively of princes of the blood.

These princes of the blood should range in rank from Lieutenant-General

up to Field Marshal, and be gorgeously salaried and equipped and

fed by the state.  Moreover--and this was the master stroke

--it should be decreed that these princely grandees should be always

addressed by a stunningly gaudy and awe-compelling title (which

I would presently invent), and they and they only in all England

should be so addressed.  Finally, all princes of the blood should

have free choice; join that regiment, get that great title, and

renounce the royal grant, or stay out and receive a grant.  Neatest

touch of all: unborn but imminent princes of the blood could be

_born_ into the regiment, and start fair, with good wages and a

permanent situation, upon due notice from the parents.



All the boys would join, I was sure of that; so, all existing

grants would be relinquished; that the newly born would always

join was equally certain.  Within sixty days that quaint and

bizarre anomaly, the Royal Grant, would cease to be a living fact,

and take its place among the curiosities of the past.







CHAPTER XXVI



THE FIRST NEWSPAPER



When I told the king I was going out disguised as a petty freeman

to scour the country and familiarize myself with the humbler life

of the people, he was all afire with the novelty of the thing

in a minute, and was bound to take a chance in the adventure

himself--nothing should stop him--he would drop everything and

go along--it was the prettiest idea he had run across for many

a day.  He wanted to glide out the back way and start at once;

but I showed him that that wouldn't answer.  You see, he was billed

for the king's-evil--to touch for it, I mean--and it wouldn't be

right to disappoint the house and it wouldn't make a delay worth

considering, anyway, it was only a one-night stand.  And I thought

he ought to tell the queen he was going away.  He clouded up at

that and looked sad.  I was sorry I had spoken, especially when

he said mournfully:



"Thou forgettest that Launcelot is here; and where Launcelot is,

she noteth not the going forth of the king, nor what day he returneth."



Of course, I changed the Subject.  Yes, Guenever was beautiful,

it is true, but take her all around she was pretty slack.  I never

meddled in these matters, they weren't my affair, but I did hate

to see the way things were going on, and I don't mind saying that

much.  Many's the time she had asked me, "Sir Boss, hast seen

Sir Launcelot about?" but if ever she went fretting around for

the king I didn't happen to be around at the time.



There was a very good lay-out for the king's-evil business--very

tidy and creditable.  The king sat under a canopy of state; about

him were clustered a large body of the clergy in full canonicals.

Conspicuous, both for location and personal outfit, stood Marinel,

a hermit of the quack-doctor species, to introduce the sick.  All

abroad over the spacious floor, and clear down to the doors,

in a thick jumble, lay or sat the scrofulous, under a strong light.

It was as good as a tableau; in fact, it had all the look of being

gotten up for that, though it wasn't.  There were eight hundred

sick people present.  The work was slow; it lacked the interest

of novelty for me, because I had seen the ceremonies before;

the thing soon became tedious, but the proprieties required me

to stick it out.  The doctor was there for the reason that in all

such crowds there were many people who only imagined something

was the matter with them, and many who were consciously sound

but wanted the immortal honor of fleshly contact with a king, and

yet others who pretended to illness in order to get the piece of

coin that went with the touch.  Up to this time this coin had been

a wee little gold piece worth about a third of a dollar.  When you

consider how much that amount of money would buy, in that age

and country, and how usual it was to be scrofulous, when not dead,

you would understand that the annual king's-evil appropriation was

just the River and Harbor bill of that government for the grip it

took on the treasury and the chance it afforded for skinning the

surplus.  So I had privately concluded to touch the treasury itself

for the king's-evil.  I covered six-sevenths of the appropriation

into the treasury a week before starting from Camelot on my

adventures, and ordered that the other seventh be inflated into

five-cent nickels and delivered into the hands of the head clerk

of the King's Evil Department; a nickel to take the place of each

gold coin, you see, and do its work for it.  It might strain the

nickel some, but I judged it could stand it.  As a rule, I do not

approve of watering stock, but I considered it square enough

in this case, for it was just a gift, anyway.  Of course, you can

water a gift as much as you want to; and I generally do.  The old

gold and silver coins of the country were of ancient and unknown

origin, as a rule, but some of them were Roman; they were ill-shapen,

and seldom rounder than a moon that is a week past the full; they

were hammered, not minted, and they were so worn with use that

the devices upon them were as illegible as blisters, and looked

like them.  I judged that a sharp, bright new nickel, with a

first-rate likeness of the king on one side of it and Guenever

on the other, and a blooming pious motto, would take the tuck out

of scrofula as handy as a nobler coin and please the scrofulous

fancy more; and I was right.  This batch was the first it was

tried on, and it worked to a charm.  The saving in expense was

a notable economy.  You will see that by these figures: We touched

a trifle over 700 of the 800 patients; at former rates, this would

have cost the government about $240; at the new rate we pulled

through for about $35, thus saving upward of $200 at one swoop.

To appreciate the full magnitude of this stroke, consider these

other figures: the annual expenses of a national government amount

to the equivalent of a contribution of three days' average wages of

every individual of the population, counting every individual as

if he were a man.  If you take a nation of 60,000,000, where average

wages are $2 per day, three days' wages taken from each individual

will provide $360,000,000 and pay the government's expenses.  In my

day, in my own country, this money was collected from imposts,

and the citizen imagined that the foreign importer paid it, and it

made him comfortable to think so; whereas, in fact, it was paid

by the American people, and was so equally and exactly distributed

among them that the annual cost to the 100-millionaire and the

annual cost to the sucking child of the day-laborer was precisely

the same--each paid $6.  Nothing could be equaler than that,

I reckon.  Well, Scotland and Ireland were tributary to Arthur,

and the united populations of the British Islands amounted to

something less than 1,000,000.  A mechanic's average wage was

3 cents a day, when he paid his own keep.  By this rule the national

government's expenses were $90,000 a year, or about $250 a day.

Thus, by the substitution of nickels for gold on a king's-evil

day, I not only injured no one, dissatisfied no one, but pleased

all concerned and saved four-fifths of that day's national expense

into the bargain--a saving which would have been the equivalent

of $800,000 in my day in America.  In making this substitution

I had drawn upon the wisdom of a very remote source--the wisdom

of my boyhood--for the true statesman does not despise any wisdom,

howsoever lowly may be its origin: in my boyhood I had always

saved my pennies and contributed buttons to the foreign missionary

cause.  The buttons would answer the ignorant savage as well as

the coin, the coin would answer me better than the buttons; all

hands were happy and nobody hurt.



Marinel took the patients as they came.  He examined the candidate;

if he couldn't qualify he was warned off; if he could he was passed

along to the king.  A priest pronounced the words, "They shall

lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover."  Then the king

stroked the ulcers, while the reading continued; finally, the

patient graduated and got his nickel--the king hanging it around

his neck himself--and was dismissed.  Would you think that that

would cure?  It certainly did.  Any mummery will cure if the

patient's faith is strong in it.  Up by Astolat there was a chapel

where the Virgin had once appeared to a girl who used to herd

geese around there--the girl said so herself--and they built the

chapel upon that spot and hung a picture in it representing the

occurrence--a picture which you would think it dangerous for a sick

person to approach; whereas, on the contrary, thousands of the lame

and the sick came and prayed before it every year and went away

whole and sound; and even the well could look upon it and live.

Of course, when I was told these things I did not believe them;

but when I went there and saw them I had to succumb.  I saw the

cures effected myself; and they were real cures and not questionable.

I saw cripples whom I had seen around Camelot for years on crutches,

arrive and pray before that picture, and put down their crutches

and walk off without a limp.  There were piles of crutches there

which had been left by such people as a testimony.



In other places people operated on a patient's mind, without saying

a word to him, and cured him.  In others, experts assembled patients

in a room and prayed over them, and appealed to their faith, and

those patients went away cured.  Wherever you find a king who can't

cure the king's-evil you can be sure that the most valuable

superstition that supports his throne--the subject's belief in

the divine appointment of his sovereign--has passed away.  In my

youth the monarchs of England had ceased to touch for the evil,

but there was no occasion for this diffidence: they could have

cured it forty-nine times in fifty.



Well, when the priest had been droning for three hours, and the

good king polishing the evidences, and the sick were still pressing

forward as plenty as ever, I got to feeling intolerably bored.

I was sitting by an open window not far from the canopy of state.

For the five hundredth time a patient stood forward to have his

repulsivenesses stroked; again those words were being droned out:

"they shall lay their hands on the sick"--when outside there rang

clear as a clarion a note that enchanted my soul and tumbled

thirteen worthless centuries about my ears: "Camelot _Weekly

Hosannah and Literary Volcano!_--latest irruption--only two cents

--all about the big miracle in the Valley of Holiness!"  One greater

than kings had arrived--the newsboy.  But I was the only person

in all that throng who knew the meaning of this mighty birth, and

what this imperial magician was come into the world to do.



I dropped a nickel out of the window and got my paper; the

Adam-newsboy of the world went around the corner to get my change;

is around the corner yet.  It was delicious to see a newspaper

again, yet I was conscious of a secret shock when my eye fell upon

the first batch of display head-lines.  I had lived in a clammy

atmosphere of reverence, respect, deference, so long that they

sent a quivery little cold wave through me:





              HIGH TIMES IN THE VALLEY



                    OF HOLINESS!



                        ----



               THE WATER-WORKS CORKED!



                        ----



         BRER MERLIN WORKS HIS ARTS, BUT GETS

                        LEFT?



                        ----



      But the Boss scores on his first Innings!



                        ----



          The Miraculous Well Uncorked amid

                  awful outbursts of



              INFERNAL FIRE AND SMOKE

                     ATHUNDER!



                        ----



           THE BUZZARD-ROOST ASTONISHED!



                        ----



              UNPARALLELED REJOIBINGS!





--and so on, and so on.  Yes, it was too loud.  Once I could have

enjoyed it and seen nothing out of the way about it, but now its

note was discordant.  It was good Arkansas journalism, but this

was not Arkansas.  Moreover, the next to the last line was calculated

to give offense to the hermits, and perhaps lose us their advertising.

Indeed, there was too lightsome a tone of flippancy all through

the paper.  It was plain I had undergone a considerable change

without noticing it.  I found myself unpleasantly affected by

pert little irreverencies which would have seemed but proper and

airy graces of speech at an earlier period of my life.  There was an

abundance of the following breed of items, and they discomforted me:



   LOCAL SMOKE AND CINDERS.



   Sir Launcelot met up with old King

   Agrivance of Ireland unexpectedly last

   weok over on the moor south of Sir

   Balmoral le Merveilleuse's hog dasture.

   The widow has been notified.



   Expedition No. 3 will start adout the

   first of mext month on a search f8r Sir

   Sagramour le Desirous. It is in com-

   and of the renowned Knight of the Red

   Lawns, assissted by Sir Persant of Inde,

   who is compete9t. intelligent, courte-

   ous, and in every way a brick, and fur-

   tHer assisted by Sir Palamides the Sara-

   cen, who is no huckleberry hinself.

   This is no pic-nic, these boys mean

   busine&s.



   The readers of the Hosannah will re-

   gret to learn that the hadndsome and

   popular Sir Charolais of Gaul, who dur-

   ing his four weeks' stay at the Bull and

   Halibut, this city, has won every heart

   by his polished manners and elegant

   cPnversation, will pUll out to-day for

   home. Give us another call, Charley!



   The bdsiness end of the funeral of

   the late Sir Dalliance the duke's son of

   Cornwall, killed in an encounter with

   the Giant of the Knotted Bludgeon last

   Tuesday on the borders of the Plain of

   Enchantment was in the hands of the

   ever affable and efficient Mumble,

   prince of un3ertakers, then whom there

   exists none by whom it were a more

   satisfying pleasure to have the last sad

   offices performed. Give him a trial.



   The cordial thanks of the Hosannah

   office are due, from editor down to

   devil, to the ever courteous and thought-

   ful Lord High Stew d of the Palace's

   Third Assistant V  t for several sau-

   ceTs of ice crEam a quality calculated

   to make the ey of the recipients hu-

   mid with grt  ude; and it done it.

   When this  administration wants to

   chalk up a desirable name for early

   promotion, the Hosannah would like a

   chance to sudgest.



   The Demoiselle Irene Dewlap, of

   South Astolat, is visiting her uncle, the

   popular host of the Cattlemen's Board-

   ing Ho&se, Liver Lane, this city.



   Young Barker the bellows-mender is

   hoMe again, and looks much improved

   by his vacation round-up among the out-

   lying smithies. See his ad.



Of course it was good enough journalism for a beginning; I knew

that quite well, and yet it was somehow disappointing.  The

"Court Circular" pleased me better; indeed, its simple and dignified

respectfulness was a distinct refreshment to me after all those

disgraceful familiarities.  But even it could have been improved.

Do what one may, there is no getting an air of variety into a court

circular, I acknowledge that.  There is a profound monotonousness

about its facts that baffles and defeats one's sincerest efforts

to make them sparkle and enthuse.  The best way to manage--in fact,

the only sensible way--is to disguise repetitiousness of fact under

variety of form: skin your fact each time and lay on a new cuticle

of words.  It deceives the eye; you think it is a new fact; it

gives you the idea that the court is carrying on like everything;

this excites you, and you drain the whole column, with a good

appetite, and perhaps never notice that it's a barrel of soup made

out of a single bean.  Clarence's way was good, it was simple,

it was dignified, it was direct and business-like; all I say is,

it was not the best way:



             COURT CIRCULAR.



   On Monday, the king rode in the park.

   "  Tuesday,      "      "        "

   "  Wendesday     "      "        "

   "  Thursday      "      "        "

   "  Friday,       "      "        "

   "  Saturday      "      "        "

   "  Sunday,       "      "        "





However, take the paper by and large, I was vastly pleased with it.

Little crudities of a mechanical sort were observable here and

there, but there were not enough of them to amount to anything,

and it was good enough Arkansas proof-reading, anyhow, and better

than was needed in Arthur's day and realm.  As a rule, the grammar

was leaky and the construction more or less lame; but I did not

much mind these things.  They are common defects of my own, and

one mustn't criticise other people on grounds where he can't stand

perpendicular himself.



I was hungry enough for literature to want to take down the whole

paper at this one meal, but I got only a few bites, and then had

to postpone, because the monks around me besieged me so with eager

questions: What is this curious thing?  What is it for?  Is it a

handkerchief?--saddle blanket?--part of a shirt?  What is it made of?

How thin it is, and how dainty and frail; and how it rattles.

Will it wear, do you think, and won't the rain injure it?  Is it

writing that appears on it, or is it only ornamentation?  They

suspected it was writing, because those among them who knew how

to read Latin and had a smattering of Greek, recognized some of

the letters, but they could make nothing out of the result as a

whole.  I put my information in the simplest form I could:



"It is a public journal; I will explain what that is, another time.

It is not cloth, it is made of paper; some time I will explain

what paper is.  The lines on it are reading matter; and not written

by hand, but printed; by and by I will explain what printing is.

A thousand of these sheets have been made, all exactly like this,

in every minute detail--they can't be told apart."  Then they all

broke out with exclamations of surprise and admiration:



"A thousand!  Verily a mighty work--a year's work for many men."



"No--merely a day's work for a man and a boy."



They crossed themselves, and whiffed out a protective prayer or two.



"Ah-h--a miracle, a wonder!  Dark work of enchantment."



I let it go at that.  Then I read in a low voice, to as many as

could crowd their shaven heads within hearing distance, part of

the account of the miracle of the restoration of the well, and

was accompanied by astonished and reverent ejaculations all through:

"Ah-h-h!"  "How true!"  "Amazing, amazing!"  "These be the very

haps as they happened, in marvelous exactness!"  And might they

take this strange thing in their hands, and feel of it and examine

it?--they would be very careful.  Yes.  So they took it, handling

it as cautiously and devoutly as if it had been some holy thing

come from some supernatural region; and gently felt of its texture,

caressed its pleasant smooth surface with lingering touch, and

scanned the mysterious characters with fascinated eyes.  These

grouped bent heads, these charmed faces, these speaking eyes

--how beautiful to me!  For was not this my darling, and was not

all this mute wonder and interest and homage a most eloquent

tribute and unforced compliment to it?  I knew, then, how a mother

feels when women, whether strangers or friends, take her new baby,

and close themselves about it with one eager impulse, and bend

their heads over it in a tranced adoration that makes all the rest

of the universe vanish out of their consciousness and be as if it

were not, for that time.  I knew how she feels, and that there is

no other satisfied ambition, whether of king, conqueror, or poet,

that ever reaches half-way to that serene far summit or yields half

so divine a contentment.



During all the rest of the seance my paper traveled from group to

group all up and down and about that huge hall, and my happy eye

was upon it always, and I sat motionless, steeped in satisfaction,

drunk with enjoyment.  Yes, this was heaven; I was tasting it once,

if I might never taste it more.







CHAPTER XXVII



THE YANKEE AND THE KING TRAVEL INCOGNITO



About bedtime I took the king to my private quarters to cut his

hair and help him get the hang of the lowly raiment he was to wear.

The high classes wore their hair banged across the forehead but

hanging to the shoulders the rest of the way around, whereas the

lowest ranks of commoners were banged fore and aft both; the slaves

were bangless, and allowed their hair free growth.  So I inverted

a bowl over his head and cut away all the locks that hung below it.

I also trimmed his whiskers and mustache until they were only

about a half-inch long; and tried to do it inartistically, and

succeeded.  It was a villainous disfigurement.  When he got his

lubberly sandals on, and his long robe of coarse brown linen cloth,

which hung straight from his neck to his ankle-bones, he was no

longer the comeliest man in his kingdom, but one of the unhandsomest

and most commonplace and unattractive.  We were dressed and barbered

alike, and could pass for small farmers, or farm bailiffs, or

shepherds, or carters; yes, or for village artisans, if we chose,

our costume being in effect universal among the poor, because of

its strength and cheapness.  I don't mean that it was really cheap

to a very poor person, but I do mean that it was the cheapest

material there was for male attire--manufactured material, you

understand.



We slipped away an hour before dawn, and by broad sun-up had made

eight or ten miles, and were in the midst of a sparsely settled

country.  I had a pretty heavy knapsack; it was laden with

provisions--provisions for the king to taper down on, till he

could take to the coarse fare of the country without damage.



I found a comfortable seat for the king by the roadside, and then

gave him a morsel or two to stay his stomach with.  Then I said

I would find some water for him, and strolled away.  Part of my

project was to get out of sight and sit down and rest a little

myself.  It had always been my custom to stand when in his presence;

even at the council board, except upon those rare occasions when

the sitting was a very long one, extending over hours; then I had

a trifling little backless thing which was like a reversed culvert

and was as comfortable as the toothache.  I didn't want to break

him in suddenly, but do it by degrees.  We should have to sit

together now when in company, or people would notice; but it would

not be good politics for me to be playing equality with him when

there was no necessity for it.



I found the water some three hundred yards away, and had been

resting about twenty minutes, when I heard voices.  That is all

right, I thought--peasants going to work; nobody else likely to be

stirring this early.  But the next moment these comers jingled into

sight around a turn of the road--smartly clad people of quality,

with luggage-mules and servants in their train!  I was off like

a shot, through the bushes, by the shortest cut.  For a while it

did seem that these people would pass the king before I could

get to him; but desperation gives you wings, you know, and I canted

my body forward, inflated my breast, and held my breath and flew.

I arrived.  And in plenty good enough time, too.



"Pardon, my king, but it's no time for ceremony--jump!  Jump to

your feet--some quality are coming!"



"Is that a marvel?  Let them come."



"But my liege!  You must not be seen sitting.  Rise!--and stand in

humble posture while they pass.  You are a peasant, you know."



"True--I had forgot it, so lost was I in planning of a huge war

with Gaul"--he was up by this time, but a farm could have got up

quicker, if there was any kind of a boom in real estate--"and

right-so a thought came randoming overthwart this majestic dream

the which--"



"A humbler attitude, my lord the king--and quick!  Duck your head!

--more!--still more!--droop it!"



He did his honest best, but lord, it was no great things.  He looked

as humble as the leaning tower at Pisa.  It is the most you could

say of it.  Indeed, it was such a thundering poor success that

it raised wondering scowls all along the line, and a gorgeous

flunkey at the tail end of it raised his whip; but I jumped in

time and was under it when it fell; and under cover of the volley

of coarse laughter which followed, I spoke up sharply and warned

the king to take no notice.  He mastered himself for the moment,

but it was a sore tax; he wanted to eat up the procession.  I said:



"It would end our adventures at the very start; and we, being

without weapons, could do nothing with that armed gang.  If we

are going to succeed in our emprise, we must not only look the

peasant but act the peasant."



"It is wisdom; none can gainsay it.  Let us go on, Sir Boss.

I will take note and learn, and do the best I may."



He kept his word.  He did the best he could, but I've seen better.

If you have ever seen an active, heedless, enterprising child

going diligently out of one mischief and into another all day

long, and an anxious mother at its heels all the while, and just

saving it by a hair from drowning itself or breaking its neck with

each new experiment, you've seen the king and me.



If I could have foreseen what the thing was going to be like,

I should have said, No, if anybody wants to make his living

exhibiting a king as a peasant, let him take the layout; I can

do better with a menagerie, and last longer.  And yet, during

the first three days I never allowed him to enter a hut or other

dwelling.  If he could pass muster anywhere during his early

novitiate it would be in small inns and on the road; so to these

places we confined ourselves.  Yes, he certainly did the best he

could, but what of that?  He didn't improve a bit that I could see.



He was always frightening me, always breaking out with fresh

astonishers, in new and unexpected places.  Toward evening on

the second day, what does he do but blandly fetch out a dirk

from inside his robe!



"Great guns, my liege, where did you get that?"



"From a smuggler at the inn, yester eve."



"What in the world possessed you to buy it?"



"We have escaped divers dangers by wit--thy wit--but I have

bethought me that it were but prudence if I bore a weapon, too.

Thine might fail thee in some pinch."



"But people of our condition are not allowed to carry arms.  What

would a lord say--yes, or any other person of whatever condition

--if he caught an upstart peasant with a dagger on his person?"



It was a lucky thing for us that nobody came along just then.

I persuaded him to throw the dirk away; and it was as easy as

persuading a child to give up some bright fresh new way of killing

itself.  We walked along, silent and thinking.  Finally the king said:



"When ye know that I meditate a thing inconvenient, or that hath

a peril in it, why do you not warn me to cease from that project?"



It was a startling question, and a puzzler.  I didn't quite know

how to take hold of it, or what to say, and so, of course, I ended

by saying the natural thing:



"But, sire, how can I know what your thoughts are?"



The king stopped dead in his tracks, and stared at me.



"I believed thou wert greater than Merlin; and truly in magic

thou art.  But prophecy is greater than magic.  Merlin is a prophet."



I saw I had made a blunder.  I must get back my lost ground.

After a deep reflection and careful planning, I said:



"Sire, I have been misunderstood.  I will explain.  There are two

kinds of prophecy.  One is the gift to foretell things that are but

a little way off, the other is the gift to foretell things that

are whole ages and centuries away.  Which is the mightier gift,

do you think?"



"Oh, the last, most surely!"



"True.  Does Merlin possess it?"



"Partly, yes.  He foretold mysteries about my birth and future

kingship that were twenty years away."



"Has he ever gone beyond that?"



"He would not claim more, I think."



"It is probably his limit.  All prophets have their limit.  The limit

of some of the great prophets has been a hundred years."



"These are few, I ween."



"There have been two still greater ones, whose limit was four

hundred and six hundred years, and one whose limit compassed

even seven hundred and twenty."



"Gramercy, it is marvelous!"



"But what are these in comparison with me?  They are nothing."



"What?  Canst thou truly look beyond even so vast a stretch

of time as--"



"Seven hundred years?  My liege, as clear as the vision of an eagle

does my prophetic eye penetrate and lay bare the future of this

world for nearly thirteen centuries and a half!"



My land, you should have seen the king's eyes spread slowly open,

and lift the earth's entire atmosphere as much as an inch!  That

settled Brer Merlin.  One never had any occasion to prove his

facts, with these people; all he had to do was to state them.  It

never occurred to anybody to doubt the statement.



"Now, then," I continued, "I _could_ work both kinds of prophecy

--the long and the short--if I chose to take the trouble to keep

in practice; but I seldom exercise any but the long kind, because

the other is beneath my dignity.  It is properer to Merlin's sort

--stump-tail prophets, as we call them in the profession.  Of course,

I whet up now and then and flirt out a minor prophecy, but not

often--hardly ever, in fact.  You will remember that there was

great talk, when you reached the Valley of Holiness, about my

having prophesied your coming and the very hour of your arrival,

two or three days beforehand."



"Indeed, yes, I mind it now."



"Well, I could have done it as much as forty times easier, and

piled on a thousand times more detail into the bargain, if it had

been five hundred years away instead of two or three days."



"How amazing that it should be so!"



"Yes, a genuine expert can always foretell a thing that is five

hundred years away easier than he can a thing that's only five

hundred seconds off."



"And yet in reason it should clearly be the other way; it should

be five hundred times as easy to foretell the last as the first,

for, indeed, it is so close by that one uninspired might almost

see it.  In truth, the law of prophecy doth contradict the likelihoods,

most strangely making the difficult easy, and the easy difficult."



It was a wise head.  A peasant's cap was no safe disguise for it;

you could know it for a king's under a diving-bell, if you could

hear it work its intellect.



I had a new trade now, and plenty of business in it.  The king

was as hungry to find out everything that was going to happen

during the next thirteen centuries as if he were expecting to live

in them.  From that time out, I prophesied myself bald-headed

trying to supply the demand.  I have done some indiscreet things in

my day, but this thing of playing myself for a prophet was the

worst.  Still, it had its ameliorations.  A prophet doesn't have

to have any brains.  They are good to have, of course, for the

ordinary exigencies of life, but they are no use in professional

work.  It is the restfulest vocation there is.  When the spirit of

prophecy comes upon you, you merely cake your intellect and lay it

off in a cool place for a rest, and unship your jaw and leave it

alone; it will work itself: the result is prophecy.



Every day a knight-errant or so came along, and the sight of them

fired the king's martial spirit every time.  He would have forgotten

himself, sure, and said something to them in a style a suspicious

shade or so above his ostensible degree, and so I always got him

well out of the road in time.  Then he would stand and look with

all his eyes; and a proud light would flash from them, and his

nostrils would inflate like a war-horse's, and I knew he was

longing for a brush with them.  But about noon of the third day

I had stopped in the road to take a precaution which had been

suggested by the whip-stroke that had fallen to my share two days

before; a precaution which I had afterward decided to leave untaken,

I was so loath to institute it; but now I had just had a fresh

reminder: while striding heedlessly along, with jaw spread and

intellect at rest, for I was prophesying, I stubbed my toe and

fell sprawling.  I was so pale I couldn't think for a moment;

then I got softly and carefully up and unstrapped my knapsack.

I had that dynamite bomb in it, done up in wool in a box.  It was

a good thing to have along; the time would come when I could do

a valuable miracle with it, maybe, but it was a nervous thing

to have about me, and I didn't like to ask the king to carry it.

Yet I must either throw it away or think up some safe way to get

along with its society.  I got it out and slipped it into my scrip,

and just then here came a couple of knights.  The king stood,

stately as a statue, gazing toward them--had forgotten himself again,

of course--and before I could get a word of warning out, it was

time for him to skip, and well that he did it, too.  He supposed

they would turn aside.  Turn aside to avoid trampling peasant dirt

under foot?  When had he ever turned aside himself--or ever had

the chance to do it, if a peasant saw him or any other noble knight

in time to judiciously save him the trouble?  The knights paid

no attention to the king at all; it was his place to look out

himself, and if he hadn't skipped he would have been placidly

ridden down, and laughed at besides.



The king was in a flaming fury, and launched out his challenge

and epithets with a most royal vigor.  The knights were some little

distance by now.  They halted, greatly surprised, and turned in

their saddles and looked back, as if wondering if it might be worth

while to bother with such scum as we.  Then they wheeled and

started for us.  Not a moment must be lost.  I started for _them_.

I passed them at a rattling gait, and as I went by I flung out a

hair-lifting soul-scorching thirteen-jointed insult which made

the king's effort poor and cheap by comparison.  I got it out of

the nineteenth century where they know how.  They had such headway

that they were nearly to the king before they could check up;

then, frantic with rage, they stood up their horses on their hind

hoofs and whirled them around, and the next moment here they came,

breast to breast.  I was seventy yards off, then, and scrambling up

a great bowlder at the roadside.  When they were within thirty

yards of me they let their long lances droop to a level, depressed

their mailed heads, and so, with their horse-hair plumes streaming

straight out behind, most gallant to see, this lightning express

came tearing for me!  When they were within fifteen yards, I sent

that bomb with a sure aim, and it struck the ground just under

the horses' noses.



Yes, it was a neat thing, very neat and pretty to see.  It resembled

a steamboat explosion on the Mississippi; and during the next

fifteen minutes we stood under a steady drizzle of microscopic

fragments of knights and hardware and horse-flesh.  I say we,

for the king joined the audience, of course, as soon as he had got

his breath again.  There was a hole there which would afford steady

work for all the people in that region for some years to come

--in trying to explain it, I mean; as for filling it up, that service

would be comparatively prompt, and would fall to the lot of a

select few--peasants of that seignory; and they wouldn't get

anything for it, either.



But I explained it to the king myself. I said it was done with a

dynamite bomb.  This information did him no damage, because it

left him as intelligent as he was before.  However, it was a noble

miracle, in his eyes, and was another settler for Merlin.  I thought

it well enough to explain that this was a miracle of so rare a sort

that it couldn't be done except when the atmospheric conditions

were just right.  Otherwise he would be encoring it every time we

had a good subject, and that would be inconvenient, because I

hadn't any more bombs along.







CHAPTER XXVIII



DRILLING THE KING



On the morning of the fourth day, when it was just sunrise, and we

had been tramping an hour in the chill dawn, I came to a resolution:

the king _must_ be drilled; things could not go on so, he must be

taken in hand and deliberately and conscientiously drilled, or we

couldn't ever venture to enter a dwelling; the very cats would know

this masquerader for a humbug and no peasant.  So I called a halt

and said:



"Sire, as between clothes and countenance, you are all right, there

is no discrepancy; but as between your clothes and your bearing,

you are all wrong, there is a most noticeable discrepancy.  Your

soldierly stride, your lordly port--these will not do.  You stand

too straight, your looks are too high, too confident.  The cares

of a kingdom do not stoop the shoulders, they do not droop the chin,

they do not depress the high level of the eye-glance, they do not

put doubt and fear in the heart and hang out the signs of them

in slouching body and unsure step.  It is the sordid cares of

the lowly born that do these things.  You must learn the trick;

you must imitate the trademarks of poverty, misery, oppression,

insult, and the other several and common inhumanities that sap

the manliness out of a man and make him a loyal and proper and

approved subject and a satisfaction to his masters, or the very

infants will know you for better than your disguise, and we shall go

to pieces at the first hut we stop at.  Pray try to walk like this."



The king took careful note, and then tried an imitation.



"Pretty fair--pretty fair.  Chin a little lower, please--there, very

good.  Eyes too high; pray don't look at the horizon, look at the

ground, ten steps in front of you.  Ah--that is better, that is

very good.  Wait, please; you betray too much vigor, too much

decision; you want more of a shamble.  Look at me, please--this is

what I mean....  Now you are getting it; that is the idea--at least,

it sort of approaches it....  Yes, that is pretty fair.  _But!_

There is a great big something wanting, I don't quite know what

it is.  Please walk thirty yards, so that I can get a perspective

on the thing....  Now, then--your head's right, speed's right,

shoulders right, eyes right, chin right, gait, carriage, general

style right--everything's right!  And yet the fact remains, the

aggregate's wrong.  The account don't balance.  Do it again,

please....  _Now_ I think I begin to see what it is.  Yes, I've

struck it.  You see, the genuine spiritlessness is wanting; that's

what's the trouble.  It's all _amateur_--mechanical details all

right, almost to a hair; everything about the delusion perfect,

except that it don't delude."



"What, then, must one do, to prevail?"



"Let me think... I can't seem to quite get at it.  In fact, there

isn't anything that can right the matter but practice.  This is

a good place for it: roots and stony ground to break up your

stately gait, a region not liable to interruption, only one field

and one hut in sight, and they so far away that nobody could

see us from there.  It will be well to move a little off the road

and put in the whole day drilling you, sire."



After the drill had gone on a little while, I said:



"Now, sire, imagine that we are at the door of the hut yonder,

and the family are before us.  Proceed, please--accost the head

of the house."



The king unconsciously straightened up like a monument, and said,

with frozen austerity:



"Varlet, bring a seat; and serve to me what cheer ye have."



"Ah, your grace, that is not well done."



"In what lacketh it?"



"These people do not call _each other_ varlets."



"Nay, is that true?"



"Yes; only those above them call them so."



"Then must I try again.  I will call him villein."



"No-no; for he may be a freeman."



"Ah--so.  Then peradventure I should call him goodman."



"That would answer, your grace, but it would be still better if

you said friend, or brother."



"Brother!--to dirt like that?"



"Ah, but _we_ are pretending to be dirt like that, too."



"It is even true.  I will say it.  Brother, bring a seat, and

thereto what cheer ye have, withal.  Now 'tis right."



"Not quite, not wholly right.  You have asked for one, not _us_

--for one, not both; food for one, a seat for one."



The king looked puzzled--he wasn't a very heavy weight, intellectually.

His head was an hour-glass; it could stow an idea, but it had to do

it a grain at a time, not the whole idea at once.



"Would _you_ have a seat also--and sit?"



"If I did not sit, the man would perceive that we were only pretending

to be equals--and playing the deception pretty poorly, too."



"It is well and truly said!  How wonderful is truth, come it in

whatsoever unexpected form it may!  Yes, he must bring out seats

and food for both, and in serving us present not ewer and napkin

with more show of respect to the one than to the other."



"And there is even yet a detail that needs correcting.  He must

bring nothing outside; we will go in--in among the dirt, and

possibly other repulsive things,--and take the food with the

household, and after the fashion of the house, and all on equal

terms, except the man be of the serf class; and finally, there

will be no ewer and no napkin, whether he be serf or free.  Please

walk again, my liege.  There--it is better--it is the best yet;

but not perfect.  The shoulders have known no ignobler burden

than iron mail, and they will not stoop."



"Give me, then, the bag.  I will learn the spirit that goeth

with burdens that have not honor.  It is the spirit that stoopeth

the shoulders, I ween, and not the weight; for armor is heavy,

yet it is a proud burden, and a man standeth straight in it....

Nay, but me no buts, offer me no objections.  I will have the thing.

Strap it upon my back."



He was complete now with that knapsack on, and looked as little

like a king as any man I had ever seen.  But it was an obstinate

pair of shoulders; they could not seem to learn the trick of

stooping with any sort of deceptive naturalness.  The drill went on,

I prompting and correcting:



"Now, make believe you are in debt, and eaten up by relentless

creditors; you are out of work--which is horse-shoeing, let us

say--and can get none; and your wife is sick, your children are

crying because they are hungry--"



And so on, and so on.  I drilled him as representing in turn all

sorts of people out of luck and suffering dire privations and

misfortunes.  But lord, it was only just words, words--they meant

nothing in the world to him, I might just as well have whistled.

Words realize nothing, vivify nothing to you, unless you have

suffered in your own person the thing which the words try to

describe.  There are wise people who talk ever so knowingly and

complacently about "the working classes," and satisfy themselves

that a day's hard intellectual work is very much harder than

a day's hard manual toil, and is righteously entitled to much

bigger pay.  Why, they really think that, you know, because they

know all about the one, but haven't tried the other.  But I know

all about both; and so far as I am concerned, there isn't money

enough in the universe to hire me to swing a pickaxe thirty days,

but I will do the hardest kind of intellectual work for just as

near nothing as you can cipher it down--and I will be satisfied, too.



Intellectual "work" is misnamed; it is a pleasure, a dissipation,

and is its own highest reward.  The poorest paid architect,

engineer, general, author, sculptor, painter, lecturer, advocate,

legislator, actor, preacher, singer is constructively in heaven

when he is at work; and as for the musician with the fiddle-bow

in his hand who sits in the midst of a great orchestra with the

ebbing and flowing tides of divine sound washing over him--why,

certainly, he is at work, if you wish to call it that, but lord,

it's a sarcasm just the same.  The law of work does seem utterly

unfair--but there it is, and nothing can change it: the higher

the pay in enjoyment the worker gets out of it, the higher shall

be his pay in cash, also.  And it's also the very law of those

transparent swindles, transmissible nobility and kingship.







CHAPTER XXIX



THE SMALLPOX HUT



When we arrived at that hut at mid-afternoon, we saw no signs

of life about it.  The field near by had been denuded of its crop

some time before, and had a skinned look, so exhaustively had

it been harvested and gleaned.  Fences, sheds, everything had a

ruined look, and were eloquent of poverty.  No animal was around

anywhere, no living thing in sight.  The stillness was awful, it

was like the stillness of death.  The cabin was a one-story one,

whose thatch was black with age, and ragged from lack of repair.



The door stood a trifle ajar.  We approached it stealthily--on tiptoe

and at half-breath--for that is the way one's feeling makes him do,

at such a time.  The king knocked.  We waited.  No answer.  Knocked

again.  No answer.  I pushed the door softly open and looked in.

I made out some dim forms, and a woman started up from the ground

and stared at me, as one does who is wakened from sleep.  Presently

she found her voice:



"Have mercy!" she pleaded.  "All is taken, nothing is left."



"I have not come to take anything, poor woman."



"You are not a priest?"



"No."



"Nor come not from the lord of the manor?"



"No, I am a stranger."



"Oh, then, for the fear of God, who visits with misery and death

such as be harmless, tarry not here, but fly!  This place is under

his curse--and his Church's."



"Let me come in and help you--you are sick and in trouble."



I was better used to the dim light now.  I could see her hollow

eyes fixed upon me.  I could see how emaciated she was.



"I tell you the place is under the Church's ban.  Save yourself

--and go, before some straggler see thee here, and report it."



"Give yourself no trouble about me; I don't care anything for the

Church's curse.  Let me help you."



"Now all good spirits--if there be any such--bless thee for that

word.  Would God I had a sup of water!--but hold, hold, forget

I said it, and fly; for there is that here that even he that

feareth not the Church must fear: this disease whereof we die.

Leave us, thou brave, good stranger, and take with thee such

whole and sincere blessing as them that be accursed can give."



But before this I had picked up a wooden bowl and was rushing

past the king on my way to the brook.  It was ten yards away.

When I got back and entered, the king was within, and was opening

the shutter that closed the window-hole, to let in air and light.

The place was full of a foul stench.  I put the bowl to the woman's

lips, and as she gripped it with her eager talons the shutter came

open and a strong light flooded her face.  Smallpox!



I sprang to the king, and said in his ear:



"Out of the door on the instant, sire! the woman is dying of that

disease that wasted the skirts of Camelot two years ago."



He did not budge.



"Of a truth I shall remain--and likewise help."



I whispered again:



"King, it must not be.  You must go."



"Ye mean well, and ye speak not unwisely.  But it were shame that

a king should know fear, and shame that belted knight should

withhold his hand where be such as need succor.  Peace, I will

not go.  It is you who must go.  The Church's ban is not upon me,

but it forbiddeth you to be here, and she will deal with you with

a heavy hand an word come to her of your trespass."



It was a desperate place for him to be in, and might cost him his

life, but it was no use to argue with him.  If he considered his

knightly honor at stake here, that was the end of argument; he

would stay, and nothing could prevent it; I was aware of that.

And so I dropped the subject.  The woman spoke:



"Fair sir, of your kindness will ye climb the ladder there,

and bring me news of what ye find?  Be not afraid to report,

for times can come when even a mother's heart is past breaking

--being already broke."



"Abide," said the king, "and give the woman to eat.  I will go."

And he put down the knapsack.



I turned to start, but the king had already started.  He halted,

and looked down upon a man who lay in a dim light, and had not

noticed us thus far, or spoken.



"Is it your husband?" the king asked.



"Yes."



"Is he asleep?"



"God be thanked for that one charity, yes--these three hours.

Where shall I pay to the full, my gratitude! for my heart is

bursting with it for that sleep he sleepeth now."



I said:



"We will be careful.  We will not wake him."



"Ah, no, that ye will not, for he is dead."



"Dead?"



"Yes, what triumph it is to know it!  None can harm him, none

insult him more.  He is in heaven now, and happy; or if not there,

he bides in hell and is content; for in that place he will find

neither abbot nor yet bishop.  We were boy and girl together; we

were man and wife these five and twenty years, and never separated

till this day.  Think how long that is to love and suffer together.

This morning was he out of his mind, and in his fancy we were

boy and girl again and wandering in the happy fields; and so in

that innocent glad converse wandered he far and farther, still

lightly gossiping, and entered into those other fields we know

not of, and was shut away from mortal sight.  And so there was

no parting, for in his fancy I went with him; he knew not but

I went with him, my hand in his--my young soft hand, not this

withered claw.  Ah, yes, to go, and know it not; to separate and

know it not; how could one go peace--fuller than that?  It was

his reward for a cruel life patiently borne."



There was a slight noise from the direction of the dim corner where

the ladder was.  It was the king descending.  I could see that he

was bearing something in one arm, and assisting himself with the

other.  He came forward into the light; upon his breast lay a

slender girl of fifteen.  She was but half conscious; she was dying

of smallpox.  Here was heroism at its last and loftiest possibility,

its utmost summit; this was challenging death in the open field

unarmed, with all the odds against the challenger, no reward set

upon the contest, and no admiring world in silks and cloth of gold

to gaze and applaud; and yet the king's bearing was as serenely

brave as it had always been in those cheaper contests where knight

meets knight in equal fight and clothed in protecting steel.  He

was great now; sublimely great.  The rude statues of his ancestors

in his palace should have an addition--I would see to that; and it

would not be a mailed king killing a giant or a dragon, like the

rest, it would be a king in commoner's garb bearing death in his

arms that a peasant mother might look her last upon her child and

be comforted.



He laid the girl down by her mother, who poured out endearments

and caresses from an overflowing heart, and one could detect a

flickering faint light of response in the child's eyes, but that

was all.  The mother hung over her, kissing her, petting her, and

imploring her to speak, but the lips only moved and no sound came.

I snatched my liquor flask from my knapsack, but the woman forbade

me, and said:



"No--she does not suffer; it is better so.  It might bring her back

to life.  None that be so good and kind as ye are would do her

that cruel hurt.  For look you--what is left to live for?  Her

brothers are gone, her father is gone, her mother goeth, the

Church's curse is upon her, and none may shelter or befriend her

even though she lay perishing in the road.  She is desolate.  I have

not asked you, good heart, if her sister be still on live, here

overhead; I had no need; ye had gone back, else, and not left

the poor thing forsaken--"



"She lieth at peace," interrupted the king, in a subdued voice.



"I would not change it.  How rich is this day in happiness!  Ah,

my Annis, thou shalt join thy sister soon--thou'rt on thy way,

and these be merciful friends that will not hinder."



And so she fell to murmuring and cooing over the girl again, and

softly stroking her face and hair, and kissing her and calling her

by endearing names; but there was scarcely sign of response now

in the glazing eyes.  I saw tears well from the king's eyes, and

trickle down his face.  The woman noticed them, too, and said:



"Ah, I know that sign: thou'st a wife at home, poor soul, and

you and she have gone hungry to bed, many's the time, that the

little ones might have your crust; you know what poverty is, and

the daily insults of your betters, and the heavy hand of the Church

and the king."



The king winced under this accidental home-shot, but kept still;

he was learning his part; and he was playing it well, too, for

a pretty dull beginner.  I struck up a diversion.  I offered the

woman food and liquor, but she refused both.  She would allow

nothing to come between her and the release of death.  Then I slipped

away and brought the dead child from aloft, and laid it by her.

This broke her down again, and there was another scene that was

full of heartbreak.  By and by I made another diversion, and beguiled

her to sketch her story.



"Ye know it well yourselves, having suffered it--for truly none

of our condition in Britain escape it.  It is the old, weary tale.

We fought and struggled and succeeded; meaning by success, that

we lived and did not die; more than that is not to be claimed.  No

troubles came that we could not outlive, till this year brought

them; then came they all at once, as one might say, and overwhelmed

us.  Years ago the lord of the manor planted certain fruit trees on

our farm; in the best part of it, too--a grievous wrong and shame--"



"But it was his right," interrupted the king.



"None denieth that, indeed; an the law mean anything, what is

the lord's is his, and what is mine is his also.  Our farm was

ours by lease, therefore 'twas likewise his, to do with it as he

would.  Some little time ago, three of those trees were found hewn

down.  Our three grown sons ran frightened to report the crime.

Well, in his lordship's dungeon there they lie, who saith there

shall they lie and rot till they confess.  They have naught to

confess, being innocent, wherefore there will they remain until

they die.  Ye know that right well, I ween.  Think how this left us;

a man, a woman and two children, to gather a crop that was planted

by so much greater force, yes, and protect it night and day from

pigeons and prowling animals that be sacred and must not be hurt

by any of our sort.  When my lord's crop was nearly ready for

the harvest, so also was ours; when his bell rang to call us to

his fields to harvest his crop for nothing, he would not allow that

I and my two girls should count for our three captive sons, but

for only two of them; so, for the lacking one were we daily fined.

All this time our own crop was perishing through neglect; and so

both the priest and his lordship fined us because their shares

of it were suffering through damage.  In the end the fines ate up

our crop--and they took it all; they took it all and made us harvest

it for them, without pay or food, and we starving.  Then the worst

came when I, being out of my mind with hunger and loss of my boys,

and grief to see my husband and my little maids in rags and misery

and despair, uttered a deep blasphemy--oh! a thousand of them!

--against the Church and the Church's ways.  It was ten days ago.

I had fallen sick with this disease, and it was to the priest

I said the words, for he was come to chide me for lack of due

humility under the chastening hand of God.  He carried my trespass

to his betters; I was stubborn; wherefore, presently upon my head

and upon all heads that were dear to me, fell the curse of Rome.



"Since that day we are avoided, shunned with horror.  None has

come near this hut to know whether we live or not.  The rest of us

were taken down.  Then I roused me and got up, as wife and mother

will.  It was little they could have eaten in any case; it was

less than little they had to eat.  But there was water, and I gave

them that.  How they craved it! and how they blessed it!  But the

end came yesterday; my strength broke down.  Yesterday was the

last time I ever saw my husband and this youngest child alive.

I have lain here all these hours--these ages, ye may say--listening,

listening for any sound up there that--"



She gave a sharp quick glance at her eldest daughter, then cried

out, "Oh, my darling!" and feebly gathered the stiffening form

to her sheltering arms.  She had recognized the death-rattle.







CHAPTER XXX



THE TRAGEDY OF THE MANOR-HOUSE



At midnight all was over, and we sat in the presence of four

corpses.  We covered them with such rags as we could find, and

started away, fastening the door behind us.  Their home must be

these people's grave, for they could not have Christian burial,

or be admitted to consecrated ground.  They were as dogs, wild

beasts, lepers, and no soul that valued its hope of eternal life

would throw it away by meddling in any sort with these rebuked and

smitten outcasts.



We had not moved four steps when I caught a sound as of footsteps

upon gravel.  My heart flew to my throat.  We must not be seen

coming from that house.  I plucked at the king's robe and we drew

back and took shelter behind the corner of the cabin.



"Now we are safe," I said, "but it was a close call--so to speak.

If the night had been lighter he might have seen us, no doubt,

he seemed to be so near."



"Mayhap it is but a beast and not a man at all."



"True.  But man or beast, it will be wise to stay here a minute

and let it get by and out of the way."



"Hark!  It cometh hither."



True again.  The step was coming toward us--straight toward the hut.

It must be a beast, then, and we might as well have saved our

trepidation.  I was going to step out, but the king laid his hand

upon my arm.  There was a moment of silence, then we heard a soft

knock on the cabin door.  It made me shiver.  Presently the knock

was repeated, and then we heard these words in a guarded voice:



"Mother!  Father!  Open--we have got free, and we bring news to

pale your cheeks but glad your hearts; and we may not tarry, but

must fly!  And--but they answer not.  Mother! father!--"



I drew the king toward the other end of the hut and whispered:



"Come--now we can get to the road."



The king hesitated, was going to demur; but just then we heard

the door give way, and knew that those desolate men were in the

presence of their dead.



"Come, my liege! in a moment they will strike a light, and then

will follow that which it would break your heart to hear."



He did not hesitate this time.  The moment we were in the road

I ran; and after a moment he threw dignity aside and followed.

I did not want to think of what was happening in the hut--I couldn't

bear it; I wanted to drive it out of my mind; so I struck into the

first subject that lay under that one in my mind:



"I have had the disease those people died of, and so have nothing

to fear; but if you have not had it also--"



He broke in upon me to say he was in trouble, and it was his

conscience that was troubling him:



"These young men have got free, they say--but _how_?  It is not

likely that their lord hath set them free."



"Oh, no, I make no doubt they escaped."



"That is my trouble; I have a fear that this is so, and your

suspicion doth confirm it, you having the same fear."



"I should not call it by that name though.  I do suspect that they

escaped, but if they did, I am not sorry, certainly."



"I am not sorry, I _think_--but--"



"What is it?  What is there for one to be troubled about?"



"_If_ they did escape, then are we bound in duty to lay hands upon

them and deliver them again to their lord; for it is not seemly

that one of his quality should suffer a so insolent and high-handed

outrage from persons of their base degree."



There it was again.  He could see only one side of it.  He was

born so, educated so, his veins were full of ancestral blood that

was rotten with this sort of unconscious brutality, brought down

by inheritance from a long procession of hearts that had each done

its share toward poisoning the stream.  To imprison these men

without proof, and starve their kindred, was no harm, for they were

merely peasants and subject to the will and pleasure of their lord,

no matter what fearful form it might take; but for these men to

break out of unjust captivity was insult and outrage, and a thing

not to be countenanced by any conscientious person who knew his

duty to his sacred caste.



I worked more than half an hour before I got him to change the

subject--and even then an outside matter did it for me.  This was

a something which caught our eyes as we struck the summit of a

small hill--a red glow, a good way off.



"That's a fire," said I.



Fires interested me considerably, because I was getting a good

deal of an insurance business started, and was also training some

horses and building some steam fire-engines, with an eye to a paid

fire department by and by.  The priests opposed both my fire and

life insurance, on the ground that it was an insolent attempt to

hinder the decrees of God; and if you pointed out that they did not

hinder the decrees in the least, but only modified the hard

consequences of them if you took out policies and had luck, they

retorted that that was gambling against the decrees of God, and was

just as bad.  So they managed to damage those industries more

or less, but I got even on my Accident business.  As a rule, a knight

is a lummox, and some times even a labrick, and hence open to pretty

poor arguments when they come glibly from a superstition-monger,

but even _he_ could see the practical side of a thing once in a while;

and so of late you couldn't clean up a tournament and pile the

result without finding one of my accident-tickets in every helmet.



We stood there awhile, in the thick darkness and stillness, looking

toward the red blur in the distance, and trying to make out the

meaning of a far-away murmur that rose and fell fitfully on the

night.  Sometimes it swelled up and for a moment seemed less

remote; but when we were hopefully expecting it to betray its cause

and nature, it dulled and sank again, carrying its mystery with it.

We started down the hill in its direction, and the winding road

plunged us at once into almost solid darkness--darkness that was

packed and crammed in between two tall forest walls.  We groped

along down for half a mile, perhaps, that murmur growing more and

more distinct all the time.  The coming storm threatening more and

more, with now and then a little shiver of wind, a faint show of

lightning, and dull grumblings of distant thunder.  I was in the

lead.  I ran against something--a soft heavy something which gave,

slightly, to the impulse of my weight; at the same moment the

lightning glared out, and within a foot of my face was the writhing

face of a man who was hanging from the limb of a tree!  That is,

it seemed to be writhing, but it was not.  It was a grewsome sight.

Straightway there was an ear-splitting explosion of thunder, and

the bottom of heaven fell out; the rain poured down in a deluge.

No matter, we must try to cut this man down, on the chance that

there might be life in him yet, mustn't we?  The lightning came

quick and sharp now, and the place was alternately noonday and

midnight.  One moment the man would be hanging before me in an

intense light, and the next he was blotted out again in the darkness.

I told the king we must cut him down.  The king at once objected.



"If he hanged himself, he was willing to lose him property to

his lord; so let him be.  If others hanged him, belike they had

the right--let him hang."



"But--"



"But me no buts, but even leave him as he is.  And for yet another

reason.  When the lightning cometh again--there, look abroad."



Two others hanging, within fifty yards of us!



"It is not weather meet for doing useless courtesies unto dead folk.

They are past thanking you.  Come--it is unprofitable to tarry here."



There was reason in what he said, so we moved on.  Within the next

mile we counted six more hanging forms by the blaze of the lightning,

and altogether it was a grisly excursion.  That murmur was a murmur

no longer, it was a roar; a roar of men's voices.  A man came flying

by now, dimly through the darkness, and other men chasing him.

They disappeared.  Presently another case of the kind occurred,

and then another and another.  Then a sudden turn of the road

brought us in sight of that fire--it was a large manor-house, and

little or nothing was left of it--and everywhere men were flying

and other men raging after them in pursuit.



I warned the king that this was not a safe place for strangers.

We would better get away from the light, until matters should

improve.  We stepped back a little, and hid in the edge of the

wood.  From this hiding-place we saw both men and women hunted

by the mob.  The fearful work went on until nearly dawn.  Then,

the fire being out and the storm spent, the voices and flying

footsteps presently ceased, and darkness and stillness reigned again.



We ventured out, and hurried cautiously away; and although we were

worn out and sleepy, we kept on until we had put this place some

miles behind us.  Then we asked hospitality at the hut of a charcoal

burner, and got what was to be had.  A woman was up and about, but

the man was still asleep, on a straw shake-down, on the clay floor.

The woman seemed uneasy until I explained that we were travelers

and had lost our way and been wandering in the woods all night.

She became talkative, then, and asked if we had heard of the

terrible goings-on at the manor-house of Abblasoure.  Yes, we had

heard of them, but what we wanted now was rest and sleep.  The

king broke in:



"Sell us the house and take yourselves away, for we be perilous

company, being late come from people that died of the Spotted Death."



It was good of him, but unnecessary.  One of the commonest decorations

of the nation was the waffle-iron face.  I had early noticed that

the woman and her husband were both so decorated.  She made us

entirely welcome, and had no fears; and plainly she was immensely

impressed by the king's proposition; for, of course, it was a good

deal of an event in her life to run across a person of the king's

humble appearance who was ready to buy a man's house for the sake

of a night's lodging.  It gave her a large respect for us, and she

strained the lean possibilities of her hovel to the utmost to make

us comfortable.



We slept till far into the afternoon, and then got up hungry enough to

make cotter fare quite palatable to the king, the more particularly

as it was scant in quantity.  And also in variety; it consisted

solely of onions, salt, and the national black bread made out of

horse-feed.  The woman told us about the affair of the evening

before.  At ten or eleven at night, when everybody was in bed,

the manor-house burst into flames.  The country-side swarmed to

the rescue, and the family were saved, with one exception, the

master.  He did not appear.  Everybody was frantic over this loss,

and two brave yeomen sacrificed their lives in ransacking the

burning house seeking that valuable personage.  But after a while

he was found--what was left of him--which was his corpse.  It was

in a copse three hundred yards away, bound, gagged, stabbed in a

dozen places.



Who had done this?  Suspicion fell upon a humble family in the

neighborhood who had been lately treated with peculiar harshness

by the baron; and from these people the suspicion easily extended

itself to their relatives and familiars.  A suspicion was enough;

my lord's liveried retainers proclaimed an instant crusade against

these people, and were promptly joined by the community in general.

The woman's husband had been active with the mob, and had not

returned home until nearly dawn.  He was gone now to find out

what the general result had been.  While we were still talking he

came back from his quest.  His report was revolting enough.  Eighteen

persons hanged or butchered, and two yeomen and thirteen prisoners

lost in the fire.



"And how many prisoners were there altogether in the vaults?"



"Thirteen."



"Then every one of them was lost?"



"Yes, all."



"But the people arrived in time to save the family; how is it they

could save none of the prisoners?"



The man looked puzzled, and said:



"Would one unlock the vaults at such a time?  Marry, some would

have escaped."



"Then you mean that nobody _did_ unlock them?"



"None went near them, either to lock or unlock.  It standeth to

reason that the bolts were fast; wherefore it was only needful

to establish a watch, so that if any broke the bonds he might not

escape, but be taken. None were taken."



"Natheless, three did escape," said the king, "and ye will do well

to publish it and set justice upon their track, for these murthered

the baron and fired the house."



I was just expecting he would come out with that.  For a moment

the man and his wife showed an eager interest in this news and

an impatience to go out and spread it; then a sudden something

else betrayed itself in their faces, and they began to ask questions.

I answered the questions myself, and narrowly watched the effects

produced.  I was soon satisfied that the knowledge of who these

three prisoners were had somehow changed the atmosphere; that

our hosts' continued eagerness to go and spread the news was now

only pretended and not real.  The king did not notice the change,

and I was glad of that.  I worked the conversation around toward

other details of the night's proceedings, and noted that these

people were relieved to have it take that direction.



The painful thing observable about all this business was the

alacrity with which this oppressed community had turned their

cruel hands against their own class in the interest of the common

oppressor.  This man and woman seemed to feel that in a quarrel

between a person of their own class and his lord, it was the natural

and proper and rightful thing for that poor devil's whole caste

to side with the master and fight his battle for him, without ever

stopping to inquire into the rights or wrongs of the matter.  This

man had been out helping to hang his neighbors, and had done his

work with zeal, and yet was aware that there was nothing against

them but a mere suspicion, with nothing back of it describable

as evidence, still neither he nor his wife seemed to see anything

horrible about it.



This was depressing--to a man with the dream of a republic in his

head.  It reminded me of a time thirteen centuries away, when

the "poor whites" of our South who were always despised and

frequently insulted by the slave-lords around them, and who owed

their base condition simply to the presence of slavery in their

midst, were yet pusillanimously ready to side with the slave-lords

in all political moves for the upholding and perpetuating of

slavery, and did also finally shoulder their muskets and pour out

their lives in an effort to prevent the destruction of that very

institution which degraded them.  And there was only one redeeming

feature connected with that pitiful piece of history; and that was,

that secretly the "poor white" did detest the slave-lord, and did

feel his own shame.  That feeling was not brought to the surface,

but the fact that it was there and could have been brought out,

under favoring circumstances, was something--in fact, it was enough;

for it showed that a man is at bottom a man, after all, even if it

doesn't show on the outside.



Well, as it turned out, this charcoal burner was just the twin of

the Southern "poor white" of the far future.  The king presently

showed impatience, and said:



"An ye prattle here all the day, justice will miscarry.  Think ye

the criminals will abide in their father's house?  They are fleeing,

they are not waiting.  You should look to it that a party of horse

be set upon their track."



The woman paled slightly, but quite perceptibly, and the man looked

flustered and irresolute.  I said:



"Come, friend, I will walk a little way with you, and explain which

direction I think they would try to take.  If they were merely

resisters of the gabelle or some kindred absurdity I would try

to protect them from capture; but when men murder a person of

high degree and likewise burn his house, that is another matter."



The last remark was for the king--to quiet him.  On the road

the man pulled his resolution together, and began the march with

a steady gait, but there was no eagerness in it.  By and by I said:



"What relation were these men to you--cousins?"



He turned as white as his layer of charcoal would let him, and

stopped, trembling.



"Ah, my God, how know ye that?"



"I didn't know it; it was a chance guess."



"Poor lads, they are lost.  And good lads they were, too."



"Were you actually going yonder to tell on them?"



He didn't quite know how to take that; but he said, hesitatingly:



"Ye-s."



"Then I think you are a damned scoundrel!"



It made him as glad as if I had called him an angel.



"Say the good words again, brother! for surely ye mean that ye

would not betray me an I failed of my duty."



"Duty?  There is no duty in the matter, except the duty to keep

still and let those men get away.  They've done a righteous deed."



He looked pleased; pleased, and touched with apprehension at the

same time.  He looked up and down the road to see that no one

was coming, and then said in a cautious voice:



"From what land come you, brother, that you speak such perilous

words, and seem not to be afraid?"



"They are not perilous words when spoken to one of my own caste,

I take it.  You would not tell anybody I said them?"



"I?  I would be drawn asunder by wild horses first."



"Well, then, let me say my say.  I have no fears of your repeating

it.  I think devil's work has been done last night upon those

innocent poor people.  That old baron got only what he deserved.

If I had my way, all his kind should have the same luck."



Fear and depression vanished from the man's manner, and gratefulness

and a brave animation took their place:



"Even though you be a spy, and your words a trap for my undoing,

yet are they such refreshment that to hear them again and others

like to them, I would go to the gallows happy, as having had one

good feast at least in a starved life.  And I will say my say now,

and ye may report it if ye be so minded.  I helped to hang my

neighbors for that it were peril to my own life to show lack of

zeal in the master's cause; the others helped for none other reason.

All rejoice to-day that he is dead, but all do go about seemingly

sorrowing, and shedding the hypocrite's tear, for in that lies

safety.  I have said the words, I have said the words! the only

ones that have ever tasted good in my mouth, and the reward of

that taste is sufficient.  Lead on, an ye will, be it even to the

scaffold, for I am ready."



There it was, you see.  A man is a man, at bottom.  Whole ages

of abuse and oppression cannot crush the manhood clear out of him.

Whoever thinks it a mistake is himself mistaken.  Yes, there is

plenty good enough material for a republic in the most degraded

people that ever existed--even the Russians; plenty of manhood

in them--even in the Germans--if one could but force it out of

its timid and suspicious privacy, to overthrow and trample in the

mud any throne that ever was set up and any nobility that ever

supported it.  We should see certain things yet, let us hope and

believe.  First, a modified monarchy, till Arthur's days were done,

then the destruction of the throne, nobility abolished, every

member of it bound out to some useful trade, universal suffrage

instituted, and the whole government placed in the hands of the

men and women of the nation there to remain.  Yes, there was no

occasion to give up my dream yet a while.







CHAPTER XXXI



MARCO



We strolled along in a sufficiently indolent fashion now, and

talked.  We must dispose of about the amount of time it ought

to take to go to the little hamlet of Abblasoure and put justice

on the track of those murderers and get back home again.  And

meantime I had an auxiliary interest which had never paled yet,

never lost its novelty for me since I had been in Arthur's kingdom:

the behavior--born of nice and exact subdivisions of caste--of chance

passers-by toward each other.  Toward the shaven monk who trudged

along with his cowl tilted back and the sweat washing down his

fat jowls, the coal-burner was deeply reverent; to the gentleman

he was abject; with the small farmer and the free mechanic he was

cordial and gossipy; and when a slave passed by with a countenance

respectfully lowered, this chap's nose was in the air--he couldn't

even see him.  Well, there are times when one would like to hang

the whole human race and finish the farce.



Presently we struck an incident.  A small mob of half-naked boys

and girls came tearing out of the woods, scared and shrieking.

The eldest among them were not more than twelve or fourteen years

old.  They implored help, but they were so beside themselves that

we couldn't make out what the matter was.  However, we plunged

into the wood, they skurrying in the lead, and the trouble was

quickly revealed: they had hanged a little fellow with a bark rope,

and he was kicking and struggling, in the process of choking to

death.  We rescued him, and fetched him around.  It was some more

human nature; the admiring little folk imitating their elders;

they were playing mob, and had achieved a success which promised

to be a good deal more serious than they had bargained for.



It was not a dull excursion for me.  I managed to put in the time

very well.  I made various acquaintanceships, and in my quality

of stranger was able to ask as many questions as I wanted to.

A thing which naturally interested me, as a statesman, was the

matter of wages.  I picked up what I could under that head during

the afternoon.  A man who hasn't had much experience, and doesn't

think, is apt to measure a nation's prosperity or lack of prosperity

by the mere size of the prevailing wages; if the wages be high, the

nation is prosperous; if low, it isn't.  Which is an error.  It

isn't what sum you get, it's how much you can buy with it, that's

the important thing; and it's that that tells whether your wages

are high in fact or only high in name.  I could remember how it

was in the time of our great civil war in the nineteenth century.

In the North a carpenter got three dollars a day, gold valuation;

in the South he got fifty--payable in Confederate shinplasters

worth a dollar a bushel.  In the North a suit of overalls cost

three dollars--a day's wages; in the South it cost seventy-five

--which was two days' wages.  Other things were in proportion.

Consequently, wages were twice as high in the North as they were

in the South, because the one wage had that much more purchasing

power than the other had.



Yes, I made various acquaintances in the hamlet and a thing that

gratified me a good deal was to find our new coins in circulation

--lots of milrays, lots of mills, lots of cents, a good many nickels,

and some silver; all this among the artisans and commonalty

generally; yes, and even some gold--but that was at the bank,

that is to say, the goldsmith's.  I dropped in there while Marco,

the son of Marco, was haggling with a shopkeeper over a quarter

of a pound of salt, and asked for change for a twenty-dollar gold

piece.  They furnished it--that is, after they had chewed the piece,

and rung it on the counter, and tried acid on it, and asked me

where I got it, and who I was, and where I was from, and where

I was going to, and when I expected to get there, and perhaps

a couple of hundred more questions; and when they got aground,

I went right on and furnished them a lot of information voluntarily;

told them I owned a dog, and his name was Watch, and my first wife

was a Free Will Baptist, and her grandfather was a Prohibitionist,

and I used to know a man who had two thumbs on each hand and a wart

on the inside of his upper lip, and died in the hope of a glorious

resurrection, and so on, and so on, and so on, till even that

hungry village questioner began to look satisfied, and also a shade

put out; but he had to respect a man of my financial strength,

and so he didn't give me any lip, but I noticed he took it out of

his underlings, which was a perfectly natural thing to do.  Yes,

they changed my twenty, but I judged it strained the bank a little,

which was a thing to be expected, for it was the same as walking

into a paltry village store in the nineteenth century and requiring

the boss of it to change a two thousand-dollar bill for you all

of a sudden.  He could do it, maybe; but at the same time he

would wonder how a small farmer happened to be carrying so much

money around in his pocket; which was probably this goldsmith's

thought, too; for he followed me to the door and stood there gazing

after me with reverent admiration.



Our new money was not only handsomely circulating, but its language

was already glibly in use; that is to say, people had dropped

the names of the former moneys, and spoke of things as being worth

so many dollars or cents or mills or milrays now.  It was very

gratifying.  We were progressing, that was sure.



I got to know several master mechanics, but about the most interesting

fellow among them was the blacksmith, Dowley.  He was a live man

and a brisk talker, and had two journeymen and three apprentices,

and was doing a raging business.  In fact, he was getting rich,

hand over fist, and was vastly respected.  Marco was very proud of

having such a man for a friend.  He had taken me there ostensibly

to let me see the big establishment which bought so much of his

charcoal, but really to let me see what easy and almost familiar

terms he was on with this great man.  Dowley and I fraternized

at once; I had had just such picked men, splendid fellows, under

me in the Colt Arms Factory.  I was bound to see more of him, so

I invited him to come out to Marco's Sunday, and dine with us.

Marco was appalled, and held his breath; and when the grandee

accepted, he was so grateful that he almost forgot to be astonished

at the condescension.



Marco's joy was exuberant--but only for a moment; then he grew

thoughtful, then sad; and when he heard me tell Dowley I should

have Dickon, the boss mason, and Smug, the boss wheelwright, out

there, too, the coal-dust on his face turned to chalk, and he lost

his grip.  But I knew what was the matter with him; it was the

expense.  He saw ruin before him; he judged that his financial

days were numbered.  However, on our way to invite the others,

I said:



"You must allow me to have these friends come; and you must also

allow me to pay the costs."



His face cleared, and he said with spirit:



"But not all of it, not all of it.  Ye cannot well bear a burden

like to this alone."



I stopped him, and said:



"Now let's understand each other on the spot, old friend.  I am

only a farm bailiff, it is true; but I am not poor, nevertheless.

I have been very fortunate this year--you would be astonished

to know how I have thriven.  I tell you the honest truth when I say

I could squander away as many as a dozen feasts like this and never

care _that_ for the expense!" and I snapped my fingers.  I could

see myself rise a foot at a time in Marco's estimation, and when

I fetched out those last words I was become a very tower for style

and altitude.  "So you see, you must let me have my way.  You

can't contribute a cent to this orgy, that's _settled_."



"It's grand and good of you--"



"No, it isn't.  You've opened your house to Jones and me in the

most generous way; Jones was remarking upon it to-day, just before

you came back from the village; for although he wouldn't be likely

to say such a thing to you--because Jones isn't a talker, and is

diffident in society--he has a good heart and a grateful, and

knows how to appreciate it when he is well treated; yes, you and

your wife have been very hospitable toward us--"



"Ah, brother, 'tis nothing--_such_ hospitality!"



"But it _is_ something; the best a man has, freely given, is always

something, and is as good as a prince can do, and ranks right

along beside it--for even a prince can but do his best.  And so

we'll shop around and get up this layout now, and don't you worry

about the expense.  I'm one of the worst spendthrifts that ever

was born.  Why, do you know, sometimes in a single week I spend

--but never mind about that--you'd never believe it anyway."



And so we went gadding along, dropping in here and there, pricing

things, and gossiping with the shopkeepers about the riot, and now

and then running across pathetic reminders of it, in the persons of

shunned and tearful and houseless remnants of families whose homes

had been taken from them and their parents butchered or hanged.

The raiment of Marco and his wife was of coarse tow-linen and

linsey-woolsey respectively, and resembled township maps, it being

made up pretty exclusively of patches which had been added, township

by township, in the course of five or six years, until hardly a

hand's-breadth of the original garments was surviving and present.

Now I wanted to fit these people out with new suits, on account of

that swell company, and I didn't know just how to get at it

--with delicacy, until at last it struck me that as I had already

been liberal in inventing wordy gratitude for the king, it would

be just the thing to back it up with evidence of a substantial

sort; so I said:



"And Marco, there's another thing which you must permit--out of

kindness for Jones--because you wouldn't want to offend him.

He was very anxious to testify his appreciation in some way, but

he is so diffident he couldn't venture it himself, and so he begged

me to buy some little things and give them to you and Dame Phyllis

and let him pay for them without your ever knowing they came from

him--you know how a delicate person feels about that sort of thing

--and so I said I would, and we would keep mum.  Well, his idea

was, a new outfit of clothes for you both--"



"Oh, it is wastefulness!  It may not be, brother, it may not be.

Consider the vastness of the sum--"



"Hang the vastness of the sum!  Try to keep quiet for a moment,

and see how it would seem; a body can't get in a word edgeways,

you talk so much.  You ought to cure that, Marco; it isn't good

form, you know, and it will grow on you if you don't check it.

Yes, we'll step in here now and price this man's stuff--and don't

forget to remember to not let on to Jones that you know he had

anything to do with it.  You can't think how curiously sensitive

and proud he is.  He's a farmer--pretty fairly well-to-do farmer

--an I'm his bailiff; _but_--the imagination of that man!  Why,

sometimes when he forgets himself and gets to blowing off, you'd

think he was one of the swells of the earth; and you might listen

to him a hundred years and never take him for a farmer--especially if

he talked agriculture.  He _thinks_ he's a Sheol of a farmer; thinks

he's old Grayback from Wayback; but between you and me privately

he don't know as much about farming as he does about running

a kingdom--still, whatever he talks about, you want to drop your

underjaw and listen, the same as if you had never heard such

incredible wisdom in all your life before, and were afraid you

might die before you got enough of it.  That will please Jones."



It tickled Marco to the marrow to hear about such an odd character;

but it also prepared him for accidents; and in my experience when

you travel with a king who is letting on to be something else and

can't remember it more than about half the time, you can't take

too many precautions.



This was the best store we had come across yet; it had everything

in it, in small quantities, from anvils and drygoods all the way

down to fish and pinchbeck jewelry.  I concluded I would bunch

my whole invoice right here, and not go pricing around any more.

So I got rid of Marco, by sending him off to invite the mason and

the wheelwright, which left the field free to me.  For I never care

to do a thing in a quiet way; it's got to be theatrical or I don't

take any interest in it.  I showed up money enough, in a careless

way, to corral the shopkeeper's respect, and then I wrote down

a list of the things I wanted, and handed it to him to see if he

could read it.  He could, and was proud to show that he could.

He said he had been educated by a priest, and could both read

and write.  He ran it through, and remarked with satisfaction that

it was a pretty heavy bill.  Well, and so it was, for a little

concern like that.  I was not only providing a swell dinner, but

some odds and ends of extras.  I ordered that the things be carted

out and delivered at the dwelling of Marco, the son of Marco,

by Saturday evening, and send me the bill at dinner-time Sunday.

He said I could depend upon his promptness and exactitude, it was

the rule of the house.  He also observed that he would throw in

a couple of miller-guns for the Marcos gratis--that everybody

was using them now.  He had a mighty opinion of that clever

device.  I said:



"And please fill them up to the middle mark, too; and add that

to the bill."



He would, with pleasure.  He filled them, and I took them with

me.  I couldn't venture to tell him that the miller-gun was a

little invention of my own, and that I had officially ordered that

every shopkeeper in the kingdom keep them on hand and sell them

at government price--which was the merest trifle, and the shopkeeper

got that, not the government.  We furnished them for nothing.



The king had hardly missed us when we got back at nightfall.  He

had early dropped again into his dream of a grand invasion of Gaul

with the whole strength of his kingdom at his back, and the afternoon

had slipped away without his ever coming to himself again.







CHAPTER XXXII



DOWLEY'S HUMILIATION



Well, when that cargo arrived toward sunset, Saturday afternoon,

I had my hands full to keep the Marcos from fainting.  They were

sure Jones and I were ruined past help, and they blamed themselves

as accessories to this bankruptcy.  You see, in addition to the

dinner-materials, which called for a sufficiently round sum,

I had bought a lot of extras for the future comfort of the family:

for instance, a big lot of wheat, a delicacy as rare to the tables

of their class as was ice-cream to a hermit's; also a sizeable

deal dinner-table; also two entire pounds of salt, which was

another piece of extravagance in those people's eyes; also crockery,

stools, the clothes, a small cask of beer, and so on.  I instructed

the Marcos to keep quiet about this sumptuousness, so as to give

me a chance to surprise the guests and show off a little.  Concerning

the new clothes, the simple couple were like children; they were up

and down, all night, to see if it wasn't nearly daylight, so that

they could put them on, and they were into them at last as much

as an hour before dawn was due.  Then their pleasure--not to say

delirium--was so fresh and novel and inspiring that the sight of it

paid me well for the interruptions which my sleep had suffered.

The king had slept just as usual--like the dead.  The Marcos could

not thank him for their clothes, that being forbidden; but they

tried every way they could think of to make him see how grateful

they were.  Which all went for nothing: he didn't notice any change.



It turned out to be one of those rich and rare fall days which is

just a June day toned down to a degree where it is heaven to be

out of doors.  Toward noon the guests arrived, and we assembled

under a great tree and were soon as sociable as old acquaintances.

Even the king's reserve melted a little, though it was some little

trouble to him to adjust himself to the name of Jones along at

first.  I had asked him to try to not forget that he was a farmer;

but I had also considered it prudent to ask him to let the thing

stand at that, and not elaborate it any.  Because he was just the

kind of person you could depend on to spoil a little thing like

that if you didn't warn him, his tongue was so handy, and his

spirit so willing, and his information so uncertain.



Dowley was in fine feather, and I early got him started, and then

adroitly worked him around onto his own history for a text and

himself for a hero, and then it was good to sit there and hear him

hum.  Self-made man, you know.  They know how to talk.  They do

deserve more credit than any other breed of men, yes, that is true;

and they are among the very first to find it out, too.  He told how

he had begun life an orphan lad without money and without friends

able to help him; how he had lived as the slaves of the meanest

master lived; how his day's work was from sixteen to eighteen hours

long, and yielded him only enough black bread to keep him in a

half-fed condition; how his faithful endeavors finally attracted

the attention of a good blacksmith, who came near knocking him

dead with kindness by suddenly offering, when he was totally

unprepared, to take him as his bound apprentice for nine years

and give him board and clothes and teach him the trade--or "mystery"

as Dowley called it.  That was his first great rise, his first

gorgeous stroke of fortune; and you saw that he couldn't yet speak

of it without a sort of eloquent wonder and delight that such a

gilded promotion should have fallen to the lot of a common human

being.  He got no new clothing during his apprenticeship, but on

his graduation day his master tricked him out in spang-new tow-linens

and made him feel unspeakably rich and fine.



"I remember me of that day!" the wheelwright sang out, with

enthusiasm.



"And I likewise!" cried the mason.  "I would not believe they

were thine own; in faith I could not."



"Nor other!" shouted Dowley, with sparkling eyes.  "I was like

to lose my character, the neighbors wending I had mayhap been

stealing.  It was a great day, a great day; one forgetteth not

days like that."



Yes, and his master was a fine man, and prosperous, and always

had a great feast of meat twice in the year, and with it white

bread, true wheaten bread; in fact, lived like a lord, so to speak.

And in time Dowley succeeded to the business and married the daughter.



"And now consider what is come to pass," said he, impressively.

"Two times in every month there is fresh meat upon my table."

He made a pause here, to let that fact sink home, then added

--"and eight times salt meat."



"It is even true," said the wheelwright, with bated breath.



"I know it of mine own knowledge," said the mason, in the same

reverent fashion.



"On my table appeareth white bread every Sunday in the year,"

added the master smith, with solemnity.  "I leave it to your own

consciences, friends, if this is not also true?"



"By my head, yes," cried the mason.



"I can testify it--and I do," said the wheelwright.



"And as to furniture, ye shall say yourselves what mine equipment

is."  He waved his hand in fine gesture of granting frank and

unhampered freedom of speech, and added: "Speak as ye are moved;

speak as ye would speak; an I were not here."



"Ye have five stools, and of the sweetest workmanship at that, albeit

your family is but three," said the wheelwright, with deep respect.



"And six wooden goblets, and six platters of wood and two of pewter

to eat and drink from withal," said the mason, impressively.  "And

I say it as knowing God is my judge, and we tarry not here alway,

but must answer at the last day for the things said in the body,

be they false or be they sooth."



"Now ye know what manner of man I am, brother Jones," said the

smith, with a fine and friendly condescension, "and doubtless ye

would look to find me a man jealous of his due of respect and

but sparing of outgo to strangers till their rating and quality be

assured, but trouble yourself not, as concerning that; wit ye well

ye shall find me a man that regardeth not these matters but is

willing to receive any he as his fellow and equal that carrieth

a right heart in his body, be his worldly estate howsoever modest.

And in token of it, here is my hand; and I say with my own mouth

we are equals--equals"--and he smiled around on the company with

the satisfaction of a god who is doing the handsome and gracious

thing and is quite well aware of it.



The king took the hand with a poorly disguised reluctance, and

let go of it as willingly as a lady lets go of a fish; all of which

had a good effect, for it was mistaken for an embarrassment natural

to one who was being called upon by greatness.



The dame brought out the table now, and set it under the tree.

It caused a visible stir of surprise, it being brand new and a

sumptuous article of deal.  But the surprise rose higher still

when the dame, with a body oozing easy indifference at every pore,

but eyes that gave it all away by absolutely flaming with vanity,

slowly unfolded an actual simon-pure tablecloth and spread it.

That was a notch above even the blacksmith's domestic grandeurs,

and it hit him hard; you could see it.  But Marco was in Paradise;

you could see that, too.  Then the dame brought two fine new

stools--whew! that was a sensation; it was visible in the eyes of

every guest.  Then she brought two more--as calmly as she could.

Sensation again--with awed murmurs.  Again she brought two

--walking on air, she was so proud.  The guests were petrified, and

the mason muttered:



"There is that about earthly pomps which doth ever move to reverence."



As the dame turned away, Marco couldn't help slapping on the climax

while the thing was hot; so he said with what was meant for a

languid composure but was a poor imitation of it:



"These suffice; leave the rest."



So there were more yet!  It was a fine effect.  I couldn't have

played the hand better myself.



From this out, the madam piled up the surprises with a rush that

fired the general astonishment up to a hundred and fifty in the

shade, and at the same time paralyzed expression of it down to

gasped "Oh's" and "Ah's," and mute upliftings of hands and eyes.

She fetched crockery--new, and plenty of it; new wooden goblets

and other table furniture; and beer, fish, chicken, a goose, eggs,

roast beef, roast mutton, a ham, a small roast pig, and a wealth

of genuine white wheaten bread.  Take it by and large, that spread

laid everything far and away in the shade that ever that crowd had

seen before.  And while they sat there just simply stupefied with

wonder and awe, I sort of waved my hand as if by accident, and

the storekeeper's son emerged from space and said he had come

to collect.



"That's all right," I said, indifferently.  "What is the amount?

give us the items."



Then he read off this bill, while those three amazed men listened,

and serene waves of satisfaction rolled over my soul and alternate

waves of terror and admiration surged over Marco's:



   2 pounds salt . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   200

   8 dozen pints beer, in the wood . . . . .   800

   3 bushels wheat . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,700

   2 pounds fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   100

   3 hens  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   400

   1 goose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   400

   3 dozen eggs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   150

   1 roast of beef . . . . . . . . . . . . .   450

   1 roast of mutton . . . . . . . . . . . .   400

   1 ham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   800

   1 sucking pig . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   500

   2 crockery dinner sets  . . . . . . . . . 6,000

   2 men's suits and underwear . . . . . . . 2,800

   1 stuff and 1 linsey-woolsey gown

     and underwear . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,600

   8 wooden goblets  . . . . . . . . . . . .   800

   Various table furniture . . . . . . . . .10,000

   1 deal table  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,000

   8 stools  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4,000

   2 miller guns, loaded . . . . . . . . . . 3,000



He ceased.  There was a pale and awful silence.  Not a limb stirred.

Not a nostril betrayed the passage of breath.



"Is that all?" I asked, in a voice of the most perfect calmness.



"All, fair sir, save that certain matters of light moment are

placed together under a head hight sundries.  If it would like

you, I will sepa--"



"It is of no consequence," I said, accompanying the words with

a gesture of the most utter indifference; "give me the grand

total, please."



The clerk leaned against the tree to stay himself, and said:



"Thirty-nine thousand one hundred and fifty milrays!"



The wheelwright fell off his stool, the others grabbed the table

to save themselves, and there was a deep and general ejaculation of:



"God be with us in the day of disaster!"



The clerk hastened to say:



"My father chargeth me to say he cannot honorably require you

to pay it all at this time, and therefore only prayeth you--"



I paid no more heed than if it were the idle breeze, but, with an

air of indifference amounting almost to weariness, got out my money

and tossed four dollars on to the table.  Ah, you should have seen

them stare!



The clerk was astonished and charmed.  He asked me to retain

one of the dollars as security, until he could go to town and

--I interrupted:



"What, and fetch back nine cents?  Nonsense!  Take the whole.

Keep the change."



There was an amazed murmur to this effect:



"Verily this being is _made_ of money!  He throweth it away even

as if it were dirt."



The blacksmith was a crushed man.



The clerk took his money and reeled away drunk with fortune.  I said

to Marco and his wife:



"Good folk, here is a little trifle for you"--handing the miller-guns

as if it were a matter of no consequence, though each of them

contained fifteen cents in solid cash; and while the poor creatures

went to pieces with astonishment and gratitude, I turned to the

others and said as calmly as one would ask the time of day:



"Well, if we are all ready, I judge the dinner is.  Come, fall to."



Ah, well, it was immense; yes, it was a daisy.  I don't know that

I ever put a situation together better, or got happier spectacular

effects out of the materials available.  The blacksmith--well, he

was simply mashed.  Land! I wouldn't have felt what that man was

feeling, for anything in the world.  Here he had been blowing and

bragging about his grand meat-feast twice a year, and his fresh

meat twice a month, and his salt meat twice a week, and his white

bread every Sunday the year round--all for a family of three; the

entire cost for the year not above 69.2.6 (sixty-nine cents, two

mills and six milrays), and all of a sudden here comes along a man

who slashes out nearly four dollars on a single blow-out; and not

only that, but acts as if it made him tired to handle such small

sums.  Yes, Dowley was a good deal wilted, and shrunk-up and

collapsed; he had the aspect of a bladder-balloon that's been

stepped on by a cow.







CHAPTER XXXIII



SIXTH CENTURY POLITICAL ECONOMY



However, I made a dead set at him, and before the first third

of the dinner was reached, I had him happy again.  It was easy

to do--in a country of ranks and castes.  You see, in a country

where they have ranks and castes, a man isn't ever a man, he is

only part of a man, he can't ever get his full growth.  You prove

your superiority over him in station, or rank, or fortune, and

that's the end of it--he knuckles down.  You can't insult him

after that.  No, I don't mean quite that; of course you _can_ insult

him, I only mean it's difficult; and so, unless you've got a lot

of useless time on your hands it doesn't pay to try.  I had the

smith's reverence now, because I was apparently immensely prosperous

and rich; I could have had his adoration if I had had some little

gimcrack title of nobility.  And not only his, but any commoner's

in the land, though he were the mightiest production of all the ages,

in intellect, worth, and character, and I bankrupt in all three.

This was to remain so, as long as England should exist in the

earth.  With the spirit of prophecy upon me, I could look into

the future and see her erect statues and monuments to her unspeakable

Georges and other royal and noble clothes-horses, and leave unhonored

the creators of this world--after God--Gutenburg, Watt, Arkwright,

Whitney, Morse, Stephenson, Bell.



The king got his cargo aboard, and then, the talk not turning upon

battle, conquest, or iron-clad duel, he dulled down to drowsiness

and went off to take a nap.  Mrs. Marco cleared the table, placed

the beer keg handy, and went away to eat her dinner of leavings

in humble privacy, and the rest of us soon drifted into matters

near and dear to the hearts of our sort--business and wages,

of course.  At a first glance, things appeared to be exceeding

prosperous in this little tributary kingdom--whose lord was

King Bagdemagus--as compared with the state of things in my own

region.  They had the "protection" system in full force here,

whereas we were working along down toward free-trade, by easy

stages, and were now about half way.  Before long, Dowley and I

were doing all the talking, the others hungrily listening.  Dowley

warmed to his work, snuffed an advantage in the air, and began

to put questions which he considered pretty awkward ones for me,

and they did have something of that look:



"In your country, brother, what is the wage of a master bailiff,

master hind, carter, shepherd, swineherd?"



"Twenty-five milrays a day; that is to say, a quarter of a cent."



The smith's face beamed with joy.  He said:



"With us they are allowed the double of it!  And what may a mechanic

get--carpenter, dauber, mason, painter, blacksmith, wheelwright,

and the like?"



"On the average, fifty milrays; half a cent a day."



"Ho-ho!  With us they are allowed a hundred!  With us any good

mechanic is allowed a cent a day!  I count out the tailor, but

not the others--they are all allowed a cent a day, and in driving

times they get more--yes, up to a hundred and ten and even fifteen

milrays a day.  I've paid a hundred and fifteen myself, within

the week.  'Rah for protection--to Sheol with free-trade!"



And his face shone upon the company like a sunburst.  But I didn't

scare at all.  I rigged up my pile-driver, and allowed myself

fifteen minutes to drive him into the earth--drive him _all_ in

--drive him in till not even the curve of his skull should show

above ground.  Here is the way I started in on him.  I asked:



"What do you pay a pound for salt?"



"A hundred milrays."



"We pay forty.  What do you pay for beef and mutton--when you

buy it?"  That was a neat hit; it made the color come.



"It varieth somewhat, but not much; one may say seventy-five milrays

the pound."



"_We_ pay thirty-three.  What do you pay for eggs?"



"Fifty milrays the dozen."



"We pay twenty.  What do you pay for beer?"



"It costeth us eight and one-half milrays the pint."



"We get it for four; twenty-five bottles for a cent.

What do you pay for wheat?"



"At the rate of nine hundred milrays the bushel."



"We pay four hundred.  What do you pay for a man's tow-linen suit?"



"Thirteen cents."



"We pay six.  What do you pay for a stuff gown for the wife of the

laborer or the mechanic?"



"We pay eight cents, four mills."



"Well, observe the difference: you pay eight cents and four mills,

we pay only four cents."  I prepared now to sock it to him.  I said:

"Look here, dear friend, _what's become of your high wages you

were bragging so about a few minutes ago?_"--and I looked around

on the company with placid satisfaction, for I had slipped up

on him gradually and tied him hand and foot, you see, without his

ever noticing that he was being tied at all.  "What's become of

those noble high wages of yours?--I seem to have knocked the

stuffing all out of them, it appears to me."



But if you will believe me, he merely looked surprised, that

is all! he didn't grasp the situation at all, didn't know he had

walked into a trap, didn't discover that he was _in_ a trap.  I could

have shot him, from sheer vexation.  With cloudy eye and a struggling

intellect he fetched this out:



"Marry, I seem not to understand.  It is _proved_ that our wages

be double thine; how then may it be that thou'st knocked therefrom

the stuffing?--an miscall not the wonderly word, this being the

first time under grace and providence of God it hath been granted

me to hear it."



Well, I was stunned; partly with this unlooked-for stupidity on

his part, and partly because his fellows so manifestly sided with

him and were of his mind--if you might call it mind.  My position

was simple enough, plain enough; how could it ever be simplified

more?  However, I must try:



"Why, look here, brother Dowley, don't you see?  Your wages are

merely higher than ours in _name_, not in _fact_."



"Hear him!  They are the _double_--ye have confessed it yourself."



"Yes-yes, I don't deny that at all.  But that's got nothing to do

with it; the _amount_ of the wages in mere coins, with meaningless

names attached to them to know them by, has got nothing to do

with it.  The thing is, how much can you _buy_ with your wages?

--that's the idea.  While it is true that with you a good mechanic

is allowed about three dollars and a half a year, and with us only

about a dollar and seventy-five--"



"There--ye're confessing it again, ye're confessing it again!"



"Confound it, I've never denied it, I tell you!  What I say is

this.  With us _half_ a dollar buys more than a _dollar_ buys

with you--and THEREFORE it stands to reason and the commonest

kind of common-sense, that our wages are _higher_ than yours."



He looked dazed, and said, despairingly:



"Verily, I cannot make it out.  Ye've just said ours are the

higher, and with the same breath ye take it back."



"Oh, great Scott, isn't it possible to get such a simple thing

through your head?  Now look here--let me illustrate.  We pay

four cents for a woman's stuff gown, you pay 8.4.0, which is

four mills more than _double_.  What do you allow a laboring

woman who works on a farm?"



"Two mills a day."



"Very good; we allow but half as much; we pay her only a tenth

of a cent a day; and--"



"Again ye're conf--"



"Wait!  Now, you see, the thing is very simple; this time you'll

understand it.  For instance, it takes your woman 42 days to earn

her gown, at 2 mills a day--7 weeks' work; but ours earns hers

in forty days--two days _short_ of 7 weeks.  Your woman has a gown,

and her whole seven weeks wages are gone; ours has a gown, and

two days' wages left, to buy something else with.  There--_now_

you understand it!"



He looked--well, he merely looked dubious, it's the most I can say;

so did the others.  I waited--to let the thing work.  Dowley spoke

at last--and betrayed the fact that he actually hadn't gotten away

from his rooted and grounded superstitions yet.  He said, with

a trifle of hesitancy:



"But--but--ye cannot fail to grant that two mills a day is better

than one."



Shucks!  Well, of course, I hated to give it up.  So I chanced

another flyer:



"Let us suppose a case.  Suppose one of your journeymen goes out

and buys the following articles:



  "1 pound of salt;

   1 dozen eggs;

   1 dozen pints of beer;

   1 bushel of wheat;

   1 tow-linen suit;

   5 pounds of beef;

   5 pounds of mutton.



"The lot will cost him 32 cents.  It takes him 32 working days

to earn the money--5 weeks and 2 days.  Let him come to us and

work 32 days at _half_ the wages; he can buy all those things for

a shade under 14 1/2 cents; they will cost him a shade under 29

days' work, and he will have about half a week's wages over.  Carry

it through the year; he would save nearly a week's wages every

two months, _your_ man nothing; thus saving five or six weeks' wages

in a year, your man not a cent.  _Now_ I reckon you understand that

'high wages' and 'low wages' are phrases that don't mean anything

in the world until you find out which of them will _buy_ the most!"



It was a crusher.



But, alas! it didn't crush.  No, I had to give it up.  What those

people valued was _high wages_; it didn't seem to be a matter of

any consequence to them whether the high wages would buy anything

or not.  They stood for "protection," and swore by it, which was

reasonable enough, because interested parties had gulled them into

the notion that it was protection which had created their high

wages.  I proved to them that in a quarter of a century their wages

had advanced but 30 per cent., while the cost of living had gone

up 100; and that with us, in a shorter time, wages had advanced

40 per cent. while the cost of living had gone steadily down.  But

it didn't do any good.  Nothing could unseat their strange beliefs.



Well, I was smarting under a sense of defeat.  Undeserved defeat,

but what of that?  That didn't soften the smart any.  And to think

of the circumstances! the first statesman of the age, the capablest

man, the best-informed man in the entire world, the loftiest

uncrowned head that had moved through the clouds of any political

firmament for centuries, sitting here apparently defeated in

argument by an ignorant country blacksmith!  And I could see that

those others were sorry for me--which made me blush till I could

smell my whiskers scorching.  Put yourself in my place; feel as mean

as I did, as ashamed as I felt--wouldn't _you_ have struck below the

belt to get even?  Yes, you would; it is simply human nature.

Well, that is what I did.  I am not trying to justify it; I'm only

saying that I was mad, and _anybody_ would have done it.



Well, when I make up my mind to hit a man, I don't plan out

a love-tap; no, that isn't my way; as long as I'm going to hit him

at all, I'm going to hit him a lifter.  And I don't jump at him

all of a sudden, and risk making a blundering half-way business

of it; no, I get away off yonder to one side, and work up on him

gradually, so that he never suspects that I'm going to hit him

at all; and by and by, all in a flash, he's flat on his back, and

he can't tell for the life of him how it all happened.  That is

the way I went for brother Dowley.  I started to talking lazy and

comfortable, as if I was just talking to pass the time; and the

oldest man in the world couldn't have taken the bearings of my

starting place and guessed where I was going to fetch up:



"Boys, there's a good many curious things about law, and custom,

and usage, and all that sort of thing, when you come to look at it;

yes, and about the drift and progress of human opinion and movement,

too.  There are written laws--they perish; but there are also

unwritten laws--_they_ are eternal.  Take the unwritten law of wages:

it says they've got to advance, little by little, straight through

the centuries.  And notice how it works.  We know what wages are

now, here and there and yonder; we strike an average, and say that's

the wages of to-day.  We know what the wages were a hundred years

ago, and what they were two hundred years ago; that's as far back

as we can get, but it suffices to give us the law of progress,

the measure and rate of the periodical augmentation; and so, without

a document to help us, we can come pretty close to determining

what the wages were three and four and five hundred years ago.

Good, so far.  Do we stop there?  No.  We stop looking backward;

we face around and apply the law to the future.  My friends, I can

tell you what people's wages are going to be at any date in the

future you want to know, for hundreds and hundreds of years."



"What, goodman, what!"



"Yes.  In seven hundred years wages will have risen to six times

what they are now, here in your region, and farm hands will be

allowed 3 cents a day, and mechanics 6."



"I would't I might die now and live then!" interrupted Smug, the

wheelwright, with a fine avaricious glow in his eye.



"And that isn't all; they'll get their board besides--such as it is:

it won't bloat them.  Two hundred and fifty years later--pay attention

now--a mechanic's wages will be--mind you, this is law, not

guesswork; a mechanic's wages will then be _twenty_ cents a day!"



There was a general gasp of awed astonishment, Dickon the mason

murmured, with raised eyes and hands:



"More than three weeks' pay for one day's work!"



"Riches!--of a truth, yes, riches!" muttered Marco, his breath

coming quick and short, with excitement.



"Wages will keep on rising, little by little, little by little,

as steadily as a tree grows, and at the end of three hundred and

forty years more there'll be at least _one_ country where the

mechanic's average wage will be _two hundred_ cents a day!"



It knocked them absolutely dumb!  Not a man of them could get

his breath for upwards of two minutes.  Then the coal-burner

said prayerfully:



"Might I but live to see it!"



"It is the income of an earl!" said Smug.



"An earl, say ye?" said Dowley; "ye could say more than that and

speak no lie; there's no earl in the realm of Bagdemagus that hath

an income like to that.  Income of an earl--mf! it's the income

of an angel!"



"Now, then, that is what is going to happen as regards wages.

In that remote day, that man will earn, with _one_ week's work,

that bill of goods which it takes you upwards of _fifty_ weeks to

earn now.  Some other pretty surprising things are going to happen,

too.  Brother Dowley, who is it that determines, every spring,

what the particular wage of each kind of mechanic, laborer, and

servant shall be for that year?"



"Sometimes the courts, sometimes the town council; but most of all,

the magistrate.  Ye may say, in general terms, it is the magistrate

that fixes the wages."



"Doesn't ask any of those poor devils to _help_ him fix their wages

for them, does he?"



"Hm!  That _were_ an idea!  The master that's to pay him the money

is the one that's rightly concerned in that matter, ye will notice."



"Yes--but I thought the other man might have some little trifle

at stake in it, too; and even his wife and children, poor creatures.

The masters are these: nobles, rich men, the prosperous generally.

These few, who do no work, determine what pay the vast hive shall

have who _do_ work.  You see?  They're a 'combine'--a trade union,

to coin a new phrase--who band themselves together to force their

lowly brother to take what they choose to give.  Thirteen hundred

years hence--so says the unwritten law--the 'combine' will be the

other way, and then how these fine people's posterity will fume

and fret and grit their teeth over the insolent tyranny of trade

unions!  Yes, indeed! the magistrate will tranquilly arrange the

wages from now clear away down into the nineteenth century; and

then all of a sudden the wage-earner will consider that a couple

of thousand years or so is enough of this one-sided sort of thing;

and he will rise up and take a hand in fixing his wages himself.

Ah, he will have a long and bitter account of wrong and humiliation

to settle."



"Do ye believe--"



"That he actually will help to fix his own wages?  Yes, indeed.

And he will be strong and able, then."



"Brave times, brave times, of a truth!" sneered the prosperous smith.



"Oh,--and there's another detail.  In that day, a master may hire

a man for only just one day, or one week, or one month at a time,

if he wants to."



"What?"



"It's true.  Moreover, a magistrate won't be able to force a man

to work for a master a whole year on a stretch whether the man

wants to or not."



"Will there be _no_ law or sense in that day?"



"Both of them, Dowley.  In that day a man will be his own property,

not the property of magistrate and master.  And he can leave town

whenever he wants to, if the wages don't suit him!--and they can't

put him in the pillory for it."



"Perdition catch such an age!" shouted Dowley, in strong indignation.

"An age of dogs, an age barren of reverence for superiors and

respect for authority!  The pillory--"



"Oh, wait, brother; say no good word for that institution.  I think

the pillory ought to be abolished."



"A most strange idea.  Why?"



"Well, I'll tell you why.  Is a man ever put in the pillory for

a capital crime?"



"No."



"Is it right to condemn a man to a slight punishment for a small

offense and then kill him?"



There was no answer.  I had scored my first point!  For the first

time, the smith wasn't up and ready.  The company noticed it.

Good effect.



"You don't answer, brother.  You were about to glorify the pillory

a while ago, and shed some pity on a future age that isn't going

to use it.  I think the pillory ought to be abolished.  What

usually happens when a poor fellow is put in the pillory for some

little offense that didn't amount to anything in the world?  The

mob try to have some fun with him, don't they?"



"Yes."



"They begin by clodding him; and they laugh themselves to pieces

to see him try to dodge one clod and get hit with another?"



"Yes."



"Then they throw dead cats at him, don't they?"



"Yes."



"Well, then, suppose he has a few personal enemies in that mob

and here and there a man or a woman with a secret grudge against

him--and suppose especially that he is unpopular in the community,

for his pride, or his prosperity, or one thing or another--stones

and bricks take the place of clods and cats presently, don't they?"



"There is no doubt of it."



"As a rule he is crippled for life, isn't he?--jaws broken, teeth

smashed out?--or legs mutilated, gangrened, presently cut off?

--or an eye knocked out, maybe both eyes?"



"It is true, God knoweth it."



"And if he is unpopular he can depend on _dying_, right there in

the stocks, can't he?"



"He surely can!  One may not deny it."



"I take it none of _you_ are unpopular--by reason of pride or

insolence, or conspicuous prosperity, or any of those things that

excite envy and malice among the base scum of a village?  _You_

wouldn't think it much of a risk to take a chance in the stocks?"



Dowley winced, visibly.  I judged he was hit.  But he didn't betray

it by any spoken word.  As for the others, they spoke out plainly,

and with strong feeling.  They said they had seen enough of the

stocks to know what a man's chance in them was, and they would

never consent to enter them if they could compromise on a quick

death by hanging.



"Well, to change the subject--for I think I've established my

point that the stocks ought to be abolished.  I think some of our

laws are pretty unfair.  For instance, if I do a thing which ought

to deliver me to the stocks, and you know I did it and yet keep

still and don't report me, _you_ will get the stocks if anybody

informs on you."



"Ah, but that would serve you but right," said Dowley, "for you

_must_ inform.  So saith the law."



The others coincided.



"Well, all right, let it go, since you vote me down.  But there's

one thing which certainly isn't fair.  The magistrate fixes a

mechanic's wage at one cent a day, for instance.  The law says that

if any master shall venture, even under utmost press of business,

to pay anything _over_ that cent a day, even for a single day, he

shall be both fined and pilloried for it; and whoever knows he did

it and doesn't inform, they also shall be fined and pilloried.  Now

it seems to me unfair, Dowley, and a deadly peril to all of us,

that because you thoughtlessly confessed, a while ago, that within

a week you have paid a cent and fifteen mil--"



Oh, I tell _you_ it was a smasher!  You ought to have seen them to

go to pieces, the whole gang.  I had just slipped up on poor

smiling and complacent Dowley so nice and easy and softly, that

he never suspected anything was going to happen till the blow

came crashing down and knocked him all to rags.



A fine effect.  In fact, as fine as any I ever produced, with so

little time to work it up in.



But I saw in a moment that I had overdone the thing a little.

I was expecting to scare them, but I wasn't expecting to scare

them to death.  They were mighty near it, though.  You see they

had been a whole lifetime learning to appreciate the pillory; and

to have that thing staring them in the face, and every one of them

distinctly at the mercy of me, a stranger, if I chose to go and

report--well, it was awful, and they couldn't seem to recover

from the shock, they couldn't seem to pull themselves together.

Pale, shaky, dumb, pitiful?  Why, they weren't any better than

so many dead men.  It was very uncomfortable.  Of course, I thought

they would appeal to me to keep mum, and then we would shake hands,

and take a drink all round, and laugh it off, and there an end.

But no; you see I was an unknown person, among a cruelly oppressed

and suspicious people, a people always accustomed to having advantage

taken of their helplessness, and never expecting just or kind

treatment from any but their own families and very closest intimates.

Appeal to _me_ to be gentle, to be fair, to be generous?  Of course,

they wanted to, but they couldn't dare.







CHAPTER XXXIV



THE YANKEE AND THE KING SOLD AS SLAVES



Well, what had I better do?  Nothing in a hurry, sure.  I must

get up a diversion; anything to employ me while I could think,

and while these poor fellows could have a chance to come to life

again.  There sat Marco, petrified in the act of trying to get

the hang of his miller-gun--turned to stone, just in the attitude

he was in when my pile-driver fell, the toy still gripped in his

unconscious fingers.  So I took it from him and proposed to explain

its mystery.  Mystery! a simple little thing like that; and yet it

was mysterious enough, for that race and that age.



I never saw such an awkward people, with machinery; you see, they

were totally unused to it.  The miller-gun was a little double-barreled

tube of toughened glass, with a neat little trick of a spring

to it, which upon pressure would let a shot escape.  But the shot

wouldn't hurt anybody, it would only drop into your hand.  In the

gun were two sizes--wee mustard-seed shot, and another sort that

were several times larger.  They were money.  The mustard-seed

shot represented milrays, the larger ones mills.  So the gun was

a purse; and very handy, too; you could pay out money in the dark

with it, with accuracy; and you could carry it in your mouth; or

in your vest pocket, if you had one.  I made them of several sizes

--one size so large that it would carry the equivalent of a dollar.

Using shot for money was a good thing for the government; the metal

cost nothing, and the money couldn't be counterfeited, for I was

the only person in the kingdom who knew how to manage a shot tower.

"Paying the shot" soon came to be a common phrase.  Yes, and I knew

it would still be passing men's lips, away down in the nineteenth

century, yet none would suspect how and when it originated.



The king joined us, about this time, mightily refreshed by his nap,

and feeling good.  Anything could make me nervous now, I was so

uneasy--for our lives were in danger; and so it worried me to

detect a complacent something in the king's eye which seemed to

indicate that he had been loading himself up for a performance

of some kind or other; confound it, why must he go and choose

such a time as this?



I was right.  He began, straight off, in the most innocently

artful, and transparent, and lubberly way, to lead up to the

subject of agriculture.  The cold sweat broke out all over me.

I wanted to whisper in his ear, "Man, we are in awful danger!

every moment is worth a principality till we get back these men's

confidence; _don't_ waste any of this golden time."  But of course

I couldn't do it.  Whisper to him?  It would look as if we were

conspiring.  So I had to sit there and look calm and pleasant while

the king stood over that dynamite mine and mooned along about his

damned onions and things.  At first the tumult of my own thoughts,

summoned by the danger-signal and swarming to the rescue from

every quarter of my skull, kept up such a hurrah and confusion

and fifing and drumming that I couldn't take in a word; but

presently when my mob of gathering plans began to crystallize

and fall into position and form line of battle, a sort of order and

quiet ensued and I caught the boom of the king's batteries, as if

out of remote distance:



"--were not the best way, methinks, albeit it is not to be denied

that authorities differ as concerning this point, some contending

that the onion is but an unwholesome berry when stricken early

from the tree--"



The audience showed signs of life, and sought each other's eyes

in a surprised and troubled way.



"--whileas others do yet maintain, with much show of reason, that

this is not of necessity the case, instancing that plums and other

like cereals do be always dug in the unripe state--"



The audience exhibited distinct distress; yes, and also fear.



"--yet are they clearly wholesome, the more especially when one

doth assuage the asperities of their nature by admixture of the

tranquilizing juice of the wayward cabbage--"



The wild light of terror began to glow in these men's eyes, and

one of them muttered, "These be errors, every one--God hath surely

smitten the mind of this farmer."  I was in miserable apprehension;

I sat upon thorns.



"--and further instancing the known truth that in the case of

animals, the young, which may be called the green fruit of the

creature, is the better, all confessing that when a goat is ripe,

his fur doth heat and sore engame his flesh, the which defect,

taken in connection with his several rancid habits, and fulsome

appetites, and godless attitudes of mind, and bilious quality

of morals--"



They rose and went for him!  With a fierce shout, "The one would

betray us, the other is mad!  Kill them!  Kill them!" they flung

themselves upon us.  What joy flamed up in the king's eye!  He

might be lame in agriculture, but this kind of thing was just in

his line.  He had been fasting long, he was hungry for a fight.

He hit the blacksmith a crack under the jaw that lifted him clear

off his feet and stretched him flat on his back.  "St. George for

Britain!" and he downed the wheelwright.  The mason was big, but

I laid him out like nothing.  The three gathered themselves up and

came again; went down again; came again; and kept on repeating

this, with native British pluck, until they were battered to jelly,

reeling with exhaustion, and so blind that they couldn't tell us

from each other; and yet they kept right on, hammering away with

what might was left in them.  Hammering each other--for we stepped

aside and looked on while they rolled, and struggled, and gouged,

and pounded, and bit, with the strict and wordless attention to

business of so many bulldogs.  We looked on without apprehension,

for they were fast getting past ability to go for help against us,

and the arena was far enough from the public road to be safe

from intrusion.



Well, while they were gradually playing out, it suddenly occurred

to me to wonder what had become of Marco.  I looked around; he

was nowhere to be seen.  Oh, but this was ominous!  I pulled the

king's sleeve, and we glided away and rushed for the hut.  No Marco

there, no Phyllis there!  They had gone to the road for help, sure.

I told the king to give his heels wings, and I would explain later.

We made good time across the open ground, and as we darted into

the shelter of the wood I glanced back and saw a mob of excited

peasants swarm into view, with Marco and his wife at their head.

They were making a world of noise, but that couldn't hurt anybody;

the wood was dense, and as soon as we were well into its depths

we would take to a tree and let them whistle.  Ah, but then came

another sound--dogs!  Yes, that was quite another matter.  It

magnified our contract--we must find running water.



We tore along at a good gait, and soon left the sounds far behind

and modified to a murmur.  We struck a stream and darted into it.

We waded swiftly down it, in the dim forest light, for as much

as three hundred yards, and then came across an oak with a great

bough sticking out over the water.  We climbed up on this bough,

and began to work our way along it to the body of the tree; now

we began to hear those sounds more plainly; so the mob had struck

our trail.  For a while the sounds approached pretty fast.  And

then for another while they didn't.  No doubt the dogs had found

the place where we had entered the stream, and were now waltzing

up and down the shores trying to pick up the trail again.



When we were snugly lodged in the tree and curtained with foliage,

the king was satisfied, but I was doubtful.  I believed we could

crawl along a branch and get into the next tree, and I judged it

worth while to try.  We tried it, and made a success of it, though

the king slipped, at the junction, and came near failing to connect.

We got comfortable lodgment and satisfactory concealment among

the foliage, and then we had nothing to do but listen to the hunt.



Presently we heard it coming--and coming on the jump, too; yes,

and down both sides of the stream.  Louder--louder--next minute

it swelled swiftly up into a roar of shoutings, barkings, tramplings,

and swept by like a cyclone.



"I was afraid that the overhanging branch would suggest something

to them," said I, "but I don't mind the disappointment.  Come,

my liege, it were well that we make good use of our time.  We've

flanked them.  Dark is coming on, presently.  If we can cross the

stream and get a good start, and borrow a couple of horses from

somebody's pasture to use for a few hours, we shall be safe enough."



We started down, and got nearly to the lowest limb, when we seemed

to hear the hunt returning.  We stopped to listen.



"Yes," said I, "they're baffled, they've given it up, they're on

their way home.  We will climb back to our roost again, and let

them go by."



So we climbed back.  The king listened a moment and said:



"They still search--I wit the sign.  We did best to abide."



He was right.  He knew more about hunting than I did.  The noise

approached steadily, but not with a rush.  The king said:



"They reason that we were advantaged by no parlous start of them,

and being on foot are as yet no mighty way from where we took

the water."



"Yes, sire, that is about it, I am afraid, though I was hoping

better things."



The noise drew nearer and nearer, and soon the van was drifting

under us, on both sides of the water.  A voice called a halt from

the other bank, and said:



"An they were so minded, they could get to yon tree by this branch

that overhangs, and yet not touch ground.  Ye will do well to send

a man up it."



"Marry, that we will do!"



I was obliged to admire my cuteness in foreseeing this very thing

and swapping trees to beat it.  But, don't you know, there are

some things that can beat smartness and foresight?  Awkwardness

and stupidity can.  The best swordsman in the world doesn't need

to fear the second best swordsman in the world; no, the person

for him to be afraid of is some ignorant antagonist who has never

had a sword in his hand before; he doesn't do the thing he ought

to do, and so the expert isn't prepared for him; he does the thing

he ought not to do; and often it catches the expert out and ends

him on the spot.  Well, how could I, with all my gifts, make any

valuable preparation against a near-sighted, cross-eyed, pudding-headed

clown who would aim himself at the wrong tree and hit the right

one?  And that is what he did.  He went for the wrong tree, which

was, of course, the right one by mistake, and up he started.



Matters were serious now.  We remained still, and awaited developments.

The peasant toiled his difficult way up.  The king raised himself

up and stood; he made a leg ready, and when the comer's head

arrived in reach of it there was a dull thud, and down went the man

floundering to the ground.  There was a wild outbreak of anger

below, and the mob swarmed in from all around, and there we were

treed, and prisoners.  Another man started up; the bridging bough

was detected, and a volunteer started up the tree that furnished

the bridge.  The king ordered me to play Horatius and keep the

bridge.  For a while the enemy came thick and fast; but no matter,

the head man of each procession always got a buffet that dislodged

him as soon as he came in reach.  The king's spirits rose, his joy

was limitless.  He said that if nothing occurred to mar the prospect

we should have a beautiful night, for on this line of tactics we

could hold the tree against the whole country-side.



However, the mob soon came to that conclusion themselves; wherefore

they called off the assault and began to debate other plans.

They had no weapons, but there were plenty of stones, and stones

might answer.  We had no objections.  A stone might possibly

penetrate to us once in a while, but it wasn't very likely; we were

well protected by boughs and foliage, and were not visible from

any good aiming point.  If they would but waste half an hour in

stone-throwing, the dark would come to our help.  We were feeling

very well satisfied.  We could smile; almost laugh.



But we didn't; which was just as well, for we should have been

interrupted.  Before the stones had been raging through the leaves

and bouncing from the boughs fifteen minutes, we began to notice

a smell.  A couple of sniffs of it was enough of an explanation

--it was smoke!  Our game was up at last.  We recognized that.  When

smoke invites you, you have to come.  They raised their pile of

dry brush and damp weeds higher and higher, and when they saw

the thick cloud begin to roll up and smother the tree, they broke

out in a storm of joy-clamors.  I got enough breath to say:



"Proceed, my liege; after you is manners."



The king gasped:



"Follow me down, and then back thyself against one side of the

trunk, and leave me the other.  Then will we fight.  Let each pile

his dead according to his own fashion and taste."



Then he descended, barking and coughing, and I followed.  I struck

the ground an instant after him; we sprang to our appointed places,

and began to give and take with all our might.  The powwow and

racket were prodigious; it was a tempest of riot and confusion and

thick-falling blows.  Suddenly some horsemen tore into the midst

of the crowd, and a voice shouted:



"Hold--or ye are dead men!"



How good it sounded!  The owner of the voice bore all the marks of

a gentleman: picturesque and costly raiment, the aspect of command,

a hard countenance, with complexion and features marred by dissipation.

The mob fell humbly back, like so many spaniels.  The gentleman

inspected us critically, then said sharply to the peasants:



"What are ye doing to these people?"



"They be madmen, worshipful sir, that have come wandering we know

not whence, and--"



"Ye know not whence?  Do ye pretend ye know them not?"



"Most honored sir, we speak but the truth.  They are strangers

and unknown to any in this region; and they be the most violent

and bloodthirsty madmen that ever--"



"Peace!  Ye know not what ye say.  They are not mad.  Who are ye?

And whence are ye?  Explain."



"We are but peaceful strangers, sir," I said, "and traveling upon

our own concerns.  We are from a far country, and unacquainted

here.  We have purposed no harm; and yet but for your brave

interference and protection these people would have killed us.

As you have divined, sir, we are not mad; neither are we violent

or bloodthirsty."



The gentleman turned to his retinue and said calmly: "Lash me

these animals to their kennels!"



The mob vanished in an instant; and after them plunged the horsemen,

laying about them with their whips and pitilessly riding down such

as were witless enough to keep the road instead of taking to the

bush.  The shrieks and supplications presently died away in the

distance, and soon the horsemen began to straggle back.  Meantime

the gentleman had been questioning us more closely, but had dug

no particulars out of us.  We were lavish of recognition of the

service he was doing us, but we revealed nothing more than that we

were friendless strangers from a far country.  When the escort were

all returned, the gentleman said to one of his servants:



"Bring the led-horses and mount these people."



"Yes, my lord."



We were placed toward the rear, among the servants.  We traveled

pretty fast, and finally drew rein some time after dark at a

roadside inn some ten or twelve miles from the scene of our

troubles.  My lord went immediately to his room, after ordering

his supper, and we saw no more of him.  At dawn in the morning

we breakfasted and made ready to start.



My lord's chief attendant sauntered forward at that moment with

indolent grace, and said:



"Ye have said ye should continue upon this road, which is our

direction likewise; wherefore my lord, the earl Grip, hath given

commandment that ye retain the horses and ride, and that certain

of us ride with ye a twenty mile to a fair town that hight Cambenet,

whenso ye shall be out of peril."



We could do nothing less than express our thanks and accept the

offer.  We jogged along, six in the party, at a moderate and

comfortable gait, and in conversation learned that my lord Grip

was a very great personage in his own region, which lay a day's

journey beyond Cambenet.  We loitered to such a degree that it was

near the middle of the forenoon when we entered the market square

of the town.  We dismounted, and left our thanks once more for

my lord, and then approached a crowd assembled in the center of

the square, to see what might be the object of interest.  It was the

remnant of that old peregrinating band of slaves!  So they had

been dragging their chains about, all this weary time.  That poor

husband was gone, and also many others; and some few purchases

had been added to the gang.  The king was not interested, and

wanted to move along, but I was absorbed, and full of pity.  I could

not take my eyes away from these worn and wasted wrecks of humanity.

There they sat, grounded upon the ground, silent, uncomplaining,

with bowed heads, a pathetic sight.  And by hideous contrast, a

redundant orator was making a speech to another gathering not thirty

steps away, in fulsome laudation of "our glorious British liberties!"



I was boiling.  I had forgotten I was a plebeian, I was remembering

I was a man.  Cost what it might, I would mount that rostrum and--



Click! the king and I were handcuffed together!  Our companions,

those servants, had done it; my lord Grip stood looking on.  The

king burst out in a fury, and said:



"What meaneth this ill-mannered jest?"



My lord merely said to his head miscreant, coolly:



"Put up the slaves and sell them!"



_Slaves!_  The word had a new sound--and how unspeakably awful!  The

king lifted his manacles and brought them down with a deadly force;

but my lord was out of the way when they arrived.  A dozen of

the rascal's servants sprang forward, and in a moment we were

helpless, with our hands bound behind us.  We so loudly and so

earnestly proclaimed ourselves freemen, that we got the interested

attention of that liberty-mouthing orator and his patriotic crowd,

and they gathered about us and assumed a very determined attitude.

The orator said:



"If, indeed, ye are freemen, ye have nought to fear--the God-given

liberties of Britain are about ye for your shield and shelter!

(Applause.)  Ye shall soon see. Bring forth your proofs."



"What proofs?"



"Proof that ye are freemen."



Ah--I remembered!  I came to myself; I said nothing.  But the

king stormed out:



"Thou'rt insane, man.  It were better, and more in reason, that

this thief and scoundrel here prove that we are _not_ freemen."



You see, he knew his own laws just as other people so often know

the laws; by words, not by effects.  They take a _meaning_, and get

to be very vivid, when you come to apply them to yourself.



All hands shook their heads and looked disappointed; some turned

away, no longer interested.  The orator said--and this time in the

tones of business, not of sentiment:



"An ye do not know your country's laws, it were time ye learned

them.  Ye are strangers to us; ye will not deny that. Ye may be

freemen, we do not deny that; but also ye may be slaves.  The law

is clear: it doth not require the claimant to prove ye are slaves,

it requireth you to prove ye are not."



I said:



"Dear sir, give us only time to send to Astolat; or give us only

time to send to the Valley of Holiness--"



"Peace, good man, these are extraordinary requests, and you may

not hope to have them granted.  It would cost much time, and would

unwarrantably inconvenience your master--"



"_Master_, idiot!" stormed the king.  "I have no master, I myself

am the m--"



"Silence, for God's sake!"



I got the words out in time to stop the king.  We were in trouble

enough already; it could not help us any to give these people

the notion that we were lunatics.



There is no use in stringing out the details.  The earl put us up

and sold us at auction.  This same infernal law had existed in

our own South in my own time, more than thirteen hundred years

later, and under it hundreds of freemen who could not prove that

they were freemen had been sold into lifelong slavery without

the circumstance making any particular impression upon me; but the

minute law and the auction block came into my personal experience,

a thing which had been merely improper before became suddenly

hellish.  Well, that's the way we are made.



Yes, we were sold at auction, like swine.  In a big town and an

active market we should have brought a good price; but this place

was utterly stagnant and so we sold at a figure which makes me

ashamed, every time I think of it.  The King of England brought

seven dollars, and his prime minister nine; whereas the king was

easily worth twelve dollars and I as easily worth fifteen.  But

that is the way things always go; if you force a sale on a dull

market, I don't care what the property is, you are going to make

a poor business of it, and you can make up your mind to it.  If

the earl had had wit enough to--



However, there is no occasion for my working my sympathies up

on his account.  Let him go, for the present; I took his number,

so to speak.



The slave-dealer bought us both, and hitched us onto that long

chain of his, and we constituted the rear of his procession.  We

took up our line of march and passed out of Cambenet at noon;

and it seemed to me unaccountably strange and odd that the King

of England and his chief minister, marching manacled and fettered

and yoked, in a slave convoy, could move by all manner of idle men

and women, and under windows where sat the sweet and the lovely,

and yet never attract a curious eye, never provoke a single remark.

Dear, dear, it only shows that there is nothing diviner about a king

than there is about a tramp, after all.  He is just a cheap and

hollow artificiality when you don't know he is a king.  But reveal

his quality, and dear me it takes your very breath away to look

at him.  I reckon we are all fools. Born so, no doubt.







CHAPTER XXXV



A PITIFUL INCIDENT



It's a world of surprises.  The king brooded; this was natural.

What would he brood about, should you say?  Why, about the prodigious

nature of his fall, of course--from the loftiest place in the world

to the lowest; from the most illustrious station in the world to

the obscurest; from the grandest vocation among men to the basest.

No, I take my oath that the thing that graveled him most, to start

with, was not this, but the price he had fetched!  He couldn't

seem to get over that seven dollars.  Well, it stunned me so, when

I first found it out, that I couldn't believe it; it didn't seem

natural.  But as soon as my mental sight cleared and I got a right

focus on it, I saw I was mistaken; it _was_ natural.  For this

reason: a king is a mere artificiality, and so a king's feelings,

like the impulses of an automatic doll, are mere artificialities;

but as a man, he is a reality, and his feelings, as a man, are

real, not phantoms.  It shames the average man to be valued below

his own estimate of his worth, and the king certainly wasn't

anything more than an average man, if he was up that high.



Confound him, he wearied me with arguments to show that in anything

like a fair market he would have fetched twenty-five dollars,

sure--a thing which was plainly nonsense, and full or the baldest

conceit; I wasn't worth it myself.  But it was tender ground for

me to argue on.  In fact, I had to simply shirk argument and do

the diplomatic instead.  I had to throw conscience aside, and

brazenly concede that he ought to have brought twenty-five dollars;

whereas I was quite well aware that in all the ages, the world had

never seen a king that was worth half the money, and during the

next thirteen centuries wouldn't see one that was worth the fourth

of it.  Yes, he tired me.  If he began to talk about the crops;

or about the recent weather; or about the condition of politics;

or about dogs, or cats, or morals, or theology--no matter what

--I sighed, for I knew what was coming; he was going to get out of it

a palliation of that tiresome seven-dollar sale.  Wherever we

halted where there was a crowd, he would give me a look which

said plainly: "if that thing could be tried over again now, with

this kind of folk, you would see a different result."  Well, when

he was first sold, it secretly tickled me to see him go for seven

dollars; but before he was done with his sweating and worrying

I wished he had fetched a hundred.  The thing never got a chance

to die, for every day, at one place or another, possible purchasers

looked us over, and, as often as any other way, their comment on

the king was something like this:



"Here's a two-dollar-and-a-half chump with a thirty-dollar style.

Pity but style was marketable."



At last this sort of remark produced an evil result.  Our owner

was a practical person and he perceived that this defect must be

mended if he hoped to find a purchaser for the king.  So he went

to work to take the style out of his sacred majesty.  I could have

given the man some valuable advice, but I didn't; you mustn't

volunteer advice to a slave-driver unless you want to damage

the cause you are arguing for.  I had found it a sufficiently

difficult job to reduce the king's style to a peasant's style,

even when he was a willing and anxious pupil; now then, to undertake

to reduce the king's style to a slave's style--and by force--go to!

it was a stately contract.  Never mind the details--it will save me

trouble to let you imagine them.  I will only remark that at the

end of a week there was plenty of evidence that lash and club

and fist had done their work well; the king's body was a sight

to see--and to weep over; but his spirit?--why, it wasn't even

phased.  Even that dull clod of a slave-driver was able to see

that there can be such a thing as a slave who will remain a man

till he dies; whose bones you can break, but whose manhood you

can't.  This man found that from his first effort down to his

latest, he couldn't ever come within reach of the king, but the

king was ready to plunge for him, and did it.  So he gave up

at last, and left the king in possession of his style unimpaired.

The fact is, the king was a good deal more than a king, he was

a man; and when a man is a man, you can't knock it out of him.



We had a rough time for a month, tramping to and fro in the earth,

and suffering.  And what Englishman was the most interested in

the slavery question by that time?  His grace the king!  Yes; from

being the most indifferent, he was become the most interested.

He was become the bitterest hater of the institution I had ever

heard talk.  And so I ventured to ask once more a question which

I had asked years before and had gotten such a sharp answer that

I had not thought it prudent to meddle in the matter further.

Would he abolish slavery?



His answer was as sharp as before, but it was music this time;

I shouldn't ever wish to hear pleasanter, though the profanity

was not good, being awkwardly put together, and with the crash-word

almost in the middle instead of at the end, where, of course, it

ought to have been.



I was ready and willing to get free now; I hadn't wanted to get

free any sooner.  No, I cannot quite say that.  I had wanted to,

but I had not been willing to take desperate chances, and had

always dissuaded the king from them.  But now--ah, it was a new

atmosphere!  Liberty would be worth any cost that might be put

upon it now.  I set about a plan, and was straightway charmed

with it.  It would require time, yes, and patience, too, a great

deal of both.  One could invent quicker ways, and fully as sure

ones; but none that would be as picturesque as this; none that

could be made so dramatic.  And so I was not going to give this

one up.  It might delay us months, but no matter, I would carry

it out or break something.



Now and then we had an adventure.  One night we were overtaken

by a snow-storm while still a mile from the village we were making

for.  Almost instantly we were shut up as in a fog, the driving

snow was so thick.  You couldn't see a thing, and we were soon

lost.  The slave-driver lashed us desperately, for he saw ruin

before him, but his lashings only made matters worse, for they

drove us further from the road and from likelihood of succor.

So we had to stop at last and slump down in the snow where we

were.  The storm continued until toward midnight, then ceased.

By this time two of our feebler men and three of our women were

dead, and others past moving and threatened with death.  Our

master was nearly beside himself.  He stirred up the living, and

made us stand, jump, slap ourselves, to restore our circulation,

and he helped as well as he could with his whip.



Now came a diversion.  We heard shrieks and yells, and soon a

woman came running and crying; and seeing our group, she flung

herself into our midst and begged for protection.  A mob of people

came tearing after her, some with torches, and they said she was a

witch who had caused several cows to die by a strange disease,

and practiced her arts by help of a devil in the form of a black

cat.  This poor woman had been stoned until she hardly looked

human, she was so battered and bloody.  The mob wanted to burn her.



Well, now, what do you suppose our master did?  When we closed

around this poor creature to shelter her, he saw his chance.  He

said, burn her here, or they shouldn't have her at all.  Imagine

that!  They were willing.  They fastened her to a post; they

brought wood and piled it about her; they applied the torch while

she shrieked and pleaded and strained her two young daughters

to her breast; and our brute, with a heart solely for business,

lashed us into position about the stake and warmed us into life

and commercial value by the same fire which took away the innocent

life of that poor harmless mother.  That was the sort of master we

had.  I took _his_ number.  That snow-storm cost him nine of his

flock; and he was more brutal to us than ever, after that, for

many days together, he was so enraged over his loss.



We had adventures all along.  One day we ran into a procession.

And such a procession!  All the riffraff of the kingdom seemed

to be comprehended in it; and all drunk at that.  In the van was

a cart with a coffin in it, and on the coffin sat a comely young

girl of about eighteen suckling a baby, which she squeezed to her

breast in a passion of love every little while, and every little

while wiped from its face the tears which her eyes rained down

upon it; and always the foolish little thing smiled up at her,

happy and content, kneading her breast with its dimpled fat hand,

which she patted and fondled right over her breaking heart.



Men and women, boys and girls, trotted along beside or after

the cart, hooting, shouting profane and ribald remarks, singing

snatches of foul song, skipping, dancing--a very holiday of

hellions, a sickening sight.  We had struck a suburb of London,

outside the walls, and this was a sample of one sort of London

society.  Our master secured a good place for us near the gallows.

A priest was in attendance, and he helped the girl climb up, and

said comforting words to her, and made the under-sheriff provide

a stool for her.  Then he stood there by her on the gallows, and

for a moment looked down upon the mass of upturned faces at his

feet, then out over the solid pavement of heads that stretched away

on every side occupying the vacancies far and near, and then began

to tell the story of the case.  And there was pity in his voice

--how seldom a sound that was in that ignorant and savage land!

I remember every detail of what he said, except the words he said

it in; and so I change it into my own words:



"Law is intended to mete out justice.  Sometimes it fails. This

cannot be helped.  We can only grieve, and be resigned, and pray

for the soul of him who falls unfairly by the arm of the law, and

that his fellows may be few.  A law sends this poor young thing

to death--and it is right.  But another law had placed her where

she must commit her crime or starve with her child--and before God

that law is responsible for both her crime and her ignominious death!



"A little while ago this young thing, this child of eighteen years,

was as happy a wife and mother as any in England; and her lips

were blithe with song, which is the native speech of glad and

innocent hearts.  Her young husband was as happy as she; for he was

doing his whole duty, he worked early and late at his handicraft,

his bread was honest bread well and fairly earned, he was prospering,

he was furnishing shelter and sustenance to his family, he was

adding his mite to the wealth of the nation.  By consent of a

treacherous law, instant destruction fell upon this holy home and

swept it away!  That young husband was waylaid and impressed,

and sent to sea.  The wife knew nothing of it.  She sought him

everywhere, she moved the hardest hearts with the supplications

of her tears, the broken eloquence of her despair.  Weeks dragged

by, she watching, waiting, hoping, her mind going slowly to wreck

under the burden of her misery.  Little by little all her small

possessions went for food.  When she could no longer pay her rent,

they turned her out of doors.  She begged, while she had strength;

when she was starving at last, and her milk failing, she stole a

piece of linen cloth of the value of a fourth part of a cent,

thinking to sell it and save her child.  But she was seen by the

owner of the cloth.  She was put in jail and brought to trial.

The man testified to the facts.  A plea was made for her, and her

sorrowful story was told in her behalf.  She spoke, too, by

permission, and said she did steal the cloth, but that her mind

was so disordered of late by trouble that when she was overborne

with hunger all acts, criminal or other, swam meaningless through

her brain and she knew nothing rightly, except that she was so

hungry!  For a moment all were touched, and there was disposition

to deal mercifully with her, seeing that she was so young and

friendless, and her case so piteous, and the law that robbed her

of her support to blame as being the first and only cause of her

transgression; but the prosecuting officer replied that whereas

these things were all true, and most pitiful as well, still there

was much small theft in these days, and mistimed mercy here would

be a danger to property--oh, my God, is there no property in ruined

homes, and orphaned babes, and broken hearts that British law

holds precious!--and so he must require sentence.



"When the judge put on his black cap, the owner of the stolen

linen rose trembling up, his lip quivering, his face as gray as

ashes; and when the awful words came, he cried out, 'Oh, poor

child, poor child, I did not know it was death!' and fell as a

tree falls.  When they lifted him up his reason was gone; before

the sun was set, he had taken his own life.  A kindly man; a man

whose heart was right, at bottom; add his murder to this that

is to be now done here; and charge them both where they belong

--to the rulers and the bitter laws of Britain.  The time is come, my

child; let me pray over thee--not _for_ thee, dear abused poor heart

and innocent, but for them that be guilty of thy ruin and death,

who need it more."



After his prayer they put the noose around the young girl's neck,

and they had great trouble to adjust the knot under her ear,

because she was devouring the baby all the time, wildly kissing it,

and snatching it to her face and her breast, and drenching it

with tears, and half moaning, half shrieking all the while, and the

baby crowing, and laughing, and kicking its feet with delight over

what it took for romp and play.  Even the hangman couldn't stand it,

but turned away.  When all was ready the priest gently pulled and

tugged and forced the child out of the mother's arms, and stepped

quickly out of her reach; but she clasped her hands, and made a

wild spring toward him, with a shriek; but the rope--and the

under-sheriff--held her short.  Then she went on her knees and

stretched out her hands and cried:



"One more kiss--oh, my God, one more, one more,--it is the dying

that begs it!"



She got it; she almost smothered the little thing.  And when they

got it away again, she cried out:



"Oh, my child, my darling, it will die!  It has no home, it has

no father, no friend, no mother--"



"It has them all!" said that good priest.  "All these will I be

to it till I die."



You should have seen her face then!  Gratitude?  Lord, what do

you want with words to express that?  Words are only painted fire;

a look is the fire itself.  She gave that look, and carried it away

to the treasury of heaven, where all things that are divine belong.







CHAPTER XXXVI



AN ENCOUNTER IN THE DARK



London--to a slave--was a sufficiently interesting place.  It was

merely a great big village; and mainly mud and thatch.  The streets

were muddy, crooked, unpaved.  The populace was an ever flocking

and drifting swarm of rags, and splendors, of nodding plumes and

shining armor.  The king had a palace there; he saw the outside

of it.  It made him sigh; yes, and swear a little, in a poor

juvenile sixth century way.  We saw knights and grandees whom

we knew, but they didn't know us in our rags and dirt and raw

welts and bruises, and wouldn't have recognized us if we had hailed

them, nor stopped to answer, either, it being unlawful to speak

with slaves on a chain.  Sandy passed within ten yards of me on

a mule--hunting for me, I imagined.  But the thing which clean

broke my heart was something which happened in front of our old

barrack in a square, while we were enduring the spectacle of a man

being boiled to death in oil for counterfeiting pennies.  It was

the sight of a newsboy--and I couldn't get at him!  Still, I had

one comfort--here was proof that Clarence was still alive and

banging away.  I meant to be with him before long; the thought was

full of cheer.



I had one little glimpse of another thing, one day, which gave me

a great uplift.  It was a wire stretching from housetop to housetop.

Telegraph or telephone, sure.  I did very much wish I had a little

piece of it.  It was just what I needed, in order to carry out my

project of escape.  My idea was to get loose some night, along with

the king, then gag and bind our master, change clothes with him,

batter him into the aspect of a stranger, hitch him to the slave-chain,

assume possession of the property, march to Camelot, and--



But you get my idea; you see what a stunning dramatic surprise

I would wind up with at the palace.  It was all feasible, if

I could only get hold of a slender piece of iron which I could

shape into a lock-pick.  I could then undo the lumbering padlocks

with which our chains were fastened, whenever I might choose.

But I never had any luck; no such thing ever happened to fall

in my way.  However, my chance came at last.  A gentleman who

had come twice before to dicker for me, without result, or indeed

any approach to a result, came again.  I was far from expecting

ever to belong to him, for the price asked for me from the time

I was first enslaved was exorbitant, and always provoked either

anger or derision, yet my master stuck stubbornly to it--twenty-two

dollars.  He wouldn't bate a cent.  The king was greatly admired,

because of his grand physique, but his kingly style was against

him, and he wasn't salable; nobody wanted that kind of a slave.

I considered myself safe from parting from him because of my

extravagant price.  No, I was not expecting to ever belong to

this gentleman whom I have spoken of, but he had something which

I expected would belong to me eventually, if he would but visit

us often enough.  It was a steel thing with a long pin to it, with

which his long cloth outside garment was fastened together in

front.  There were three of them. He had disappointed me twice,

because he did not come quite close enough to me to make my project

entirely safe; but this time I succeeded; I captured the lower

clasp of the three, and when he missed it he thought he had lost

it on the way.



I had a chance to be glad about a minute, then straightway a chance

to be sad again.  For when the purchase was about to fail, as usual,

the master suddenly spoke up and said what would be worded thus

--in modern English:



"I'll tell you what I'll do.  I'm tired supporting these two for

no good.  Give me twenty-two dollars for this one, and I'll throw

the other one in."



The king couldn't get his breath, he was in such a fury.  He began

to choke and gag, and meantime the master and the gentleman moved

away discussing.



"An ye will keep the offer open--"



"'Tis open till the morrow at this hour."



"Then I will answer you at that time," said the gentleman, and

disappeared, the master following him.



I had a time of it to cool the king down, but I managed it.

I whispered in his ear, to this effect:



"Your grace _will_ go for nothing, but after another fashion.  And

so shall I.  To-night we shall both be free."



"Ah!  How is that?"



"With this thing which I have stolen, I will unlock these locks

and cast off these chains to-night.  When he comes about nine-thirty

to inspect us for the night, we will seize him, gag him, batter

him, and early in the morning we will march out of this town,

proprietors of this caravan of slaves."



That was as far as I went, but the king was charmed and satisfied.

That evening we waited patiently for our fellow-slaves to get

to sleep and signify it by the usual sign, for you must not take

many chances on those poor fellows if you can avoid it.  It is

best to keep your own secrets.  No doubt they fidgeted only about

as usual, but it didn't seem so to me.  It seemed to me that they

were going to be forever getting down to their regular snoring.

As the time dragged on I got nervously afraid we shouldn't have

enough of it left for our needs; so I made several premature

attempts, and merely delayed things by it; for I couldn't seem

to touch a padlock, there in the dark, without starting a rattle

out of it which interrupted somebody's sleep and made him turn

over and wake some more of the gang.



But finally I did get my last iron off, and was a free man once

more.  I took a good breath of relief, and reached for the king's

irons.  Too late! in comes the master, with a light in one hand

and his heavy walking-staff in the other.  I snuggled close among

the wallow of snorers, to conceal as nearly as possible that I was

naked of irons; and I kept a sharp lookout and prepared to spring

for my man the moment he should bend over me.



But he didn't approach.  He stopped, gazed absently toward our

dusky mass a minute, evidently thinking about something else;

then set down his light, moved musingly toward the door, and before

a body could imagine what he was going to do, he was out of the

door and had closed it behind him.



"Quick!" said the king.  "Fetch him back!"



Of course, it was the thing to do, and I was up and out in a

moment.  But, dear me, there were no lamps in those days, and

it was a dark night.  But I glimpsed a dim figure a few steps

away.  I darted for it, threw myself upon it, and then there was

a state of things and lively!  We fought and scuffled and struggled,

and drew a crowd in no time.  They took an immense interest in

the fight and encouraged us all they could, and, in fact, couldn't

have been pleasanter or more cordial if it had been their own

fight.  Then a tremendous row broke out behind us, and as much

as half of our audience left us, with a rush, to invest some

sympathy in that.  Lanterns began to swing in all directions;

it was the watch gathering from far and near.  Presently a halberd

fell across my back, as a reminder, and I knew what it meant.

I was in custody.  So was my adversary.  We were marched off toward

prison, one on each side of the watchman.  Here was disaster,

here was a fine scheme gone to sudden destruction!  I tried to

imagine what would happen when the master should discover that

it was I who had been fighting him; and what would happen if they

jailed us together in the general apartment for brawlers and petty

law-breakers, as was the custom; and what might--



Just then my antagonist turned his face around in my direction,

the freckled light from the watchman's tin lantern fell on it,

and, by George, he was the wrong man!







CHAPTER XXXVII



AN AWFUL PREDICAMENT



Sleep?  It was impossible.  It would naturally have been impossible

in that noisome cavern of a jail, with its mangy crowd of drunken,

quarrelsome, and song-singing rapscallions.  But the thing that

made sleep all the more a thing not to be dreamed of, was my

racking impatience to get out of this place and find out the whole

size of what might have happened yonder in the slave-quarters

in consequence of that intolerable miscarriage of mine.



It was a long night, but the morning got around at last.  I made

a full and frank explanation to the court.  I said I was a slave,

the property of the great Earl Grip, who had arrived just after

dark at the Tabard inn in the village on the other side of the

water, and had stopped there over night, by compulsion, he being

taken deadly sick with a strange and sudden disorder.  I had been

ordered to cross to the city in all haste and bring the best

physician; I was doing my best; naturally I was running with all

my might; the night was dark, I ran against this common person

here, who seized me by the throat and began to pummel me, although

I told him my errand, and implored him, for the sake of the great

earl my master's mortal peril--



The common person interrupted and said it was a lie; and was going

to explain how I rushed upon him and attacked him without a word--



"Silence, sirrah!" from the court.  "Take him hence and give him

a few stripes whereby to teach him how to treat the servant of

a nobleman after a different fashion another time.  Go!"



Then the court begged my pardon, and hoped I would not fail

to tell his lordship it was in no wise the court's fault that this

high-handed thing had happened.  I said I would make it all right,

and so took my leave.  Took it just in time, too; he was starting

to ask me why I didn't fetch out these facts the moment I was

arrested.  I said I would if I had thought of it--which was true

--but that I was so battered by that man that all my wit was knocked

out of me--and so forth and so on, and got myself away, still

mumbling.  I didn't wait for breakfast.  No grass grew under my

feet.  I was soon at the slave quarters.  Empty--everybody gone!

That is, everybody except one body--the slave-master's.  It lay

there all battered to pulp; and all about were the evidences of

a terrific fight.  There was a rude board coffin on a cart at

the door, and workmen, assisted by the police, were thinning a

road through the gaping crowd in order that they might bring it in.



I picked out a man humble enough in life to condescend to talk

with one so shabby as I, and got his account of the matter.



"There were sixteen slaves here.  They rose against their master

in the night, and thou seest how it ended."



"Yes.  How did it begin?"



"There was no witness but the slaves.  They said the slave that

was most valuable got free of his bonds and escaped in some strange

way--by magic arts 'twas thought, by reason that he had no key,

and the locks were neither broke nor in any wise injured.  When

the master discovered his loss, he was mad with despair, and threw

himself upon his people with his heavy stick, who resisted and

brake his back and in other and divers ways did give him hurts

that brought him swiftly to his end."



"This is dreadful.  It will go hard with the slaves, no doubt,

upon the trial."



"Marry, the trial is over."



"Over!"



"Would they be a week, think you--and the matter so simple?  They

were not the half of a quarter of an hour at it."



"Why, I don't see how they could determine which were the guilty

ones in so short a time."



"_Which_ ones?  Indeed, they considered not particulars like to that.

They condemned them in a body.  Wit ye not the law?--which men

say the Romans left behind them here when they went--that if one

slave killeth his master all the slaves of that man must die for it."



"True.  I had forgotten.  And when will these die?"



"Belike within a four and twenty hours; albeit some say they will

wait a pair of days more, if peradventure they may find the missing

one meantime."



The missing one!  It made me feel uncomfortable.



"Is it likely they will find him?"



"Before the day is spent--yes.  They seek him everywhere.  They

stand at the gates of the town, with certain of the slaves who

will discover him to them if he cometh, and none can pass out

but he will be first examined."



"Might one see the place where the rest are confined?"



"The outside of it--yes.  The inside of it--but ye will not want

to see that."



I took the address of that prison for future reference and then

sauntered off.  At the first second-hand clothing shop I came to,

up a back street, I got a rough rig suitable for a common seaman

who might be going on a cold voyage, and bound up my face with

a liberal bandage, saying I had a toothache.  This concealed my

worst bruises.  It was a transformation.  I no longer resembled my

former self.  Then I struck out for that wire, found it and

followed it to its den.  It was a little room over a butcher's

shop--which meant that business wasn't very brisk in the telegraphic

line.  The young chap in charge was drowsing at his table.  I locked

the door and put the vast key in my bosom.  This alarmed the young

fellow, and he was going to make a noise; but I said:



"Save your wind; if you open your mouth you are dead, sure.  Tackle

your instrument.  Lively, now!  Call Camelot."



"This doth amaze me!  How should such as you know aught of such

matters as--"



"Call Camelot!  I am a desperate man.  Call Camelot, or get away

from the instrument and I will do it myself."



"What--you?"



"Yes--certainly.  Stop gabbling.  Call the palace."



He made the call.



"Now, then, call Clarence."



"Clarence _who_?"



"Never mind Clarence who.  Say you want Clarence; you'll get

an answer."



He did so.  We waited five nerve-straining minutes--ten minutes

--how long it did seem!--and then came a click that was as familiar

to me as a human voice; for Clarence had been my own pupil.



"Now, my lad, vacate!  They would have known _my_ touch, maybe,

and so your call was surest; but I'm all right now."



He vacated the place and cocked his ear to listen--but it didn't

win.  I used a cipher.  I didn't waste any time in sociabilities

with Clarence, but squared away for business, straight-off--thus:



"The king is here and in danger.  We were captured and brought

here as slaves.  We should not be able to prove our identity

--and the fact is, I am not in a position to try.  Send a telegram

for the palace here which will carry conviction with it."



His answer came straight back:



"They don't know anything about the telegraph; they haven't had

any experience yet, the line to London is so new.  Better not

venture that.  They might hang you.  Think up something else."



Might hang us!  Little he knew how closely he was crowding the

facts.  I couldn't think up anything for the moment.  Then an idea

struck me, and I started it along:



"Send five hundred picked knights with Launcelot in the lead; and

send them on the jump.  Let them enter by the southwest gate, and

look out for the man with a white cloth around his right arm."



The answer was prompt:



"They shall start in half an hour."



"All right, Clarence; now tell this lad here that I'm a friend

of yours and a dead-head; and that he must be discreet and say

nothing about this visit of mine."



The instrument began to talk to the youth and I hurried away.

I fell to ciphering.  In half an hour it would be nine o'clock.

Knights and horses in heavy armor couldn't travel very fast.

These would make the best time they could, and now that the ground

was in good condition, and no snow or mud, they would probably

make a seven-mile gait; they would have to change horses a couple

of times; they would arrive about six, or a little after; it would

still be plenty light enough; they would see the white cloth which

I should tie around my right arm, and I would take command.  We

would surround that prison and have the king out in no time.

It would be showy and picturesque enough, all things considered,

though I would have preferred noonday, on account of the more

theatrical aspect the thing would have.



Now, then, in order to increase the strings to my bow, I thought

I would look up some of those people whom I had formerly recognized,

and make myself known.  That would help us out of our scrape,

without the knights.  But I must proceed cautiously, for it was

a risky business.  I must get into sumptuous raiment, and it

wouldn't do to run and jump into it.  No, I must work up to it

by degrees, buying suit after suit of clothes, in shops wide apart,

and getting a little finer article with each change, until I should

finally reach silk and velvet, and be ready for my project.  So

I started.



But the scheme fell through like scat!  The first corner I turned,

I came plump upon one of our slaves, snooping around with a watchman.

I coughed at the moment, and he gave me a sudden look that bit right

into my marrow.  I judge he thought he had heard that cough before.

I turned immediately into a shop and worked along down the counter,

pricing things and watching out of the corner of my eye.  Those

people had stopped, and were talking together and looking in at

the door.  I made up my mind to get out the back way, if there

was a back way, and I asked the shopwoman if I could step out

there and look for the escaped slave, who was believed to be in

hiding back there somewhere, and said I was an officer in disguise,

and my pard was yonder at the door with one of the murderers in

charge, and would she be good enough to step there and tell him

he needn't wait, but had better go at once to the further end of

the back alley and be ready to head him off when I rousted him out.



She was blazing with eagerness to see one of those already celebrated

murderers, and she started on the errand at once.  I slipped out

the back way, locked the door behind me, put the key in my pocket

and started off, chuckling to myself and comfortable.



Well, I had gone and spoiled it again, made another mistake.

A double one, in fact.  There were plenty of ways to get rid of

that officer by some simple and plausible device, but no, I must

pick out a picturesque one; it is the crying defect of my character.

And then, I had ordered my procedure upon what the officer, being

human, would _naturally_ do; whereas when you are least expecting it,

a man will now and then go and do the very thing which it's _not_

natural for him to do.  The natural thing for the officer to do,

in this case, was to follow straight on my heels; he would find

a stout oaken door, securely locked, between him and me; before

he could break it down, I should be far away and engaged in slipping

into a succession of baffling disguises which would soon get me

into a sort of raiment which was a surer protection from meddling

law-dogs in Britain than any amount of mere innocence and purity

of character.  But instead of doing the natural thing, the officer

took me at my word, and followed my instructions.  And so, as I

came trotting out of that cul de sac, full of satisfaction with my

own cleverness, he turned the corner and I walked right into his

handcuffs.  If I had known it was a cul de sac--however, there

isn't any excusing a blunder like that, let it go.  Charge it up

to profit and loss.



Of course, I was indignant, and swore I had just come ashore from

a long voyage, and all that sort of thing--just to see, you know,

if it would deceive that slave.  But it didn't.  He knew me.  Then

I reproached him for betraying me.  He was more surprised than

hurt.  He stretched his eyes wide, and said:



"What, wouldst have me let thee, of all men, escape and not hang

with us, when thou'rt the very _cause_ of our hanging?  Go to!"



"Go to" was their way of saying "I should smile!" or "I like that!"

Queer talkers, those people.



Well, there was a sort of bastard justice in his view of the case,

and so I dropped the matter.  When you can't cure a disaster by

argument, what is the use to argue?  It isn't my way.  So I only said:



"You're not going to be hanged.  None of us are."



Both men laughed, and the slave said:



"Ye have not ranked as a fool--before.  You might better keep

your reputation, seeing the strain would not be for long."



"It will stand it, I reckon.  Before to-morrow we shall be out

of prison, and free to go where we will, besides."



The witty officer lifted at his left ear with his thumb, made

a rasping noise in his throat, and said:



"Out of prison--yes--ye say true.  And free likewise to go where

ye will, so ye wander not out of his grace the Devil's sultry realm."



I kept my temper, and said, indifferently:



"Now I suppose you really think we are going to hang within

a day or two."



"I thought it not many minutes ago, for so the thing was decided

and proclaimed."



"Ah, then you've changed your mind, is that it?"



"Even that.  I only _thought_, then; I _know_, now."



I felt sarcastical, so I said:



"Oh, sapient servant of the law, condescend to tell us, then,

what you _know_."



"That ye will all be hanged _to-day_, at mid-afternoon!  Oho! that

shot hit home!  Lean upon me."



The fact is I did need to lean upon somebody.  My knights couldn't

arrive in time.  They would be as much as three hours too late.

Nothing in the world could save the King of England; nor me, which

was more important.  More important, not merely to me, but to

the nation--the only nation on earth standing ready to blossom

into civilization.  I was sick.  I said no more, there wasn't

anything to say.  I knew what the man meant; that if the missing

slave was found, the postponement would be revoked, the execution

take place to-day.  Well, the missing slave was found.







CHAPTER XXXVIII



SIR LAUNCELOT AND KNIGHTS TO THE RESCUE



Nearing four in the afternoon.  The scene was just outside the

walls of London.  A cool, comfortable, superb day, with a brilliant

sun; the kind of day to make one want to live, not die.  The

multitude was prodigious and far-reaching; and yet we fifteen

poor devils hadn't a friend in it.  There was something painful

in that thought, look at it how you might.  There we sat, on our

tall scaffold, the butt of the hate and mockery of all those

enemies.  We were being made a holiday spectacle.  They had built

a sort of grand stand for the nobility and gentry, and these were

there in full force, with their ladies.  We recognized a good

many of them.



The crowd got a brief and unexpected dash of diversion out of

the king.  The moment we were freed of our bonds he sprang up,

in his fantastic rags, with face bruised out of all recognition, and

proclaimed himself Arthur, King of Britain, and denounced the

awful penalties of treason upon every soul there present if hair

of his sacred head were touched.  It startled and surprised him

to hear them break into a vast roar of laughter.  It wounded his

dignity, and he locked himself up in silence.  Then, although

the crowd begged him to go on, and tried to provoke him to it

by catcalls, jeers, and shouts of:



"Let him speak!  The king!  The king! his humble subjects hunger

and thirst for words of wisdom out of the mouth of their master

his Serene and Sacred Raggedness!"



But it went for nothing.  He put on all his majesty and sat under

this rain of contempt and insult unmoved.  He certainly was great

in his way.  Absently, I had taken off my white bandage and wound

it about my right arm.  When the crowd noticed this, they began

upon me.  They said:



"Doubtless this sailor-man is his minister--observe his costly

badge of office!"



I let them go on until they got tired, and then I said:



"Yes, I am his minister, The Boss; and to-morrow you will hear

that from Camelot which--"



I got no further.  They drowned me out with joyous derision.  But

presently there was silence; for the sheriffs of London, in their

official robes, with their subordinates, began to make a stir which

indicated that business was about to begin.  In the hush which

followed, our crime was recited, the death warrant read, then

everybody uncovered while a priest uttered a prayer.



Then a slave was blindfolded; the hangman unslung his rope.  There

lay the smooth road below us, we upon one side of it, the banked

multitude wailing its other side--a good clear road, and kept free

by the police--how good it would be to see my five hundred horsemen

come tearing down it!  But no, it was out of the possibilities.

I followed its receding thread out into the distance--not a horseman

on it, or sign of one.



There was a jerk, and the slave hung dangling; dangling and hideously

squirming, for his limbs were not tied.



A second rope was unslung, in a moment another slave was dangling.



In a minute a third slave was struggling in the air.  It was

dreadful.  I turned away my head a moment, and when I turned back

I missed the king!  They were blindfolding him!  I was paralyzed;

I couldn't move, I was choking, my tongue was petrified.  They

finished blindfolding him, they led him under the rope.  I couldn't

shake off that clinging impotence.  But when I saw them put the

noose around his neck, then everything let go in me and I made

a spring to the rescue--and as I made it I shot one more glance

abroad--by George! here they came, a-tilting!--five hundred mailed

and belted knights on bicycles!



The grandest sight that ever was seen.  Lord, how the plumes

streamed, how the sun flamed and flashed from the endless procession

of webby wheels!



I waved my right arm as Launcelot swept in--he recognized my rag

--I tore away noose and bandage, and shouted:



"On your knees, every rascal of you, and salute the king!  Who

fails shall sup in hell to-night!"



I always use that high style when I'm climaxing an effect.  Well,

it was noble to see Launcelot and the boys swarm up onto that

scaffold and heave sheriffs and such overboard.  And it was fine

to see that astonished multitude go down on their knees and beg

their lives of the king they had just been deriding and insulting.

And as he stood apart there, receiving this homage in rags,

I thought to myself, well, really there is something peculiarly

grand about the gait and bearing of a king, after all.



I was immensely satisfied.  Take the whole situation all around,

it was one of the gaudiest effects I ever instigated.



And presently up comes Clarence, his own self! and winks, and

says, very modernly:



"Good deal of a surprise, wasn't it?  I knew you'd like it.  I've

had the boys practicing this long time, privately; and just hungry

for a chance to show off."







CHAPTER XXXIX



THE YANKEE'S FIGHT WITH THE KNIGHTS



Home again, at Camelot.  A morning or two later I found the paper,

damp from the press, by my plate at the breakfast table.  I turned

to the advertising columns, knowing I should find something of

personal interest to me there.  It was this:



             DE PAR LE ROI.



   Know that the great lord and illus-

   trious Kni8ht, SIR SAGRAMOR LE

   DESIROUS naving condescended to

   meet the King's Minister, Hank Mor-

    gan, the which is surnamed The Boss,

   for satisfgction of offence anciently given,

   these wilL engage in the lists by

   Camelot about the fourth hour of the

   morning of the sixteenth day of this

   next succeeding month. The battle

   will be a l outrance, sith the said offence

   was of a deadly sort, admitting of no

   comPosition.



             DE PAR LE ROI





Clarence's editorial reference to this affair was to this effect:



   It will be observed, by a gl7nce at our

   advertising columns, that the commu-

   nity is to be favored with a treat of un-

   usual interest in the tournament line.

   The n ames of the artists are warrant of

   good enterTemment. The box-office

   will be open at noon of the 13th; ad-

   mission 3 cents, reserved seatsh 5; pro-

   ceeds to go to the hospital fund  The

   royal pair and all the Court will be pres-

   ent. With these exceptions, and the

   press and the clergy, the free list is strict-

   ly susPended. Parties are hereby warn-

   ed against buying tickets of speculators;

   they will not be good at the door.

   Everybody knows and likes The Boss,

   everybody knows and likes Sir Sag.;

   come, let us give the lads a good send-

   off. ReMember, the proceeds go to a

   great and free charity, and one whose

   broad begevolence stretches out its help-

   ing hand, warm with the blood of a lov-

   ing heart, to all that suffer, regardless of

   race, creed, condition or color--the

   only charity yet established in the earth

   which has no politico-religious stop-

   cock on its compassion, but says Here

   flows the stream, let ALL come and

   drink! Turn out, all hands! fetch along

   your dou3hnuts and your gum-drops

   and have a good time. Pie for sale on

   the grounds, and rocks to crack it with;

   and ciRcus-lemonade--three drops of

   lime juice to a barrel of water.

   N.B. This is the first tournament

   under the new law, whidh allow each

   combatant to use any weapon he may pre-

   fer. You may want to make a note of that.



Up to the day set, there was no talk in all Britain of anything

but this combat.  All other topics sank into insignificance and

passed out of men's thoughts and interest.  It was not because

a tournament was a great matter, it was not because Sir Sagramor

had found the Holy Grail, for he had not, but had failed; it was

not because the second (official) personage in the kingdom was

one of the duellists; no, all these features were commonplace.

Yet there was abundant reason for the extraordinary interest which

this coming fight was creating.  It was born of the fact that all

the nation knew that this was not to be a duel between mere men,

so to speak, but a duel between two mighty magicians; a duel not

of muscle but of mind, not of human skill but of superhuman art

and craft; a final struggle for supremacy between the two master

enchanters of the age.  It was realized that the most prodigious

achievements of the most renowned knights could not be worthy

of comparison with a spectacle like this; they could be but child's

play, contrasted with this mysterious and awful battle of the gods.

Yes, all the world knew it was going to be in reality a duel

between Merlin and me, a measuring of his magic powers against

mine.  It was known that Merlin had been busy whole days and nights

together, imbuing Sir Sagramor's arms and armor with supernal

powers of offense and defense, and that he had procured for him

from the spirits of the air a fleecy veil which would render the

wearer invisible to his antagonist while still visible to other

men.  Against Sir Sagramor, so weaponed and protected, a thousand

knights could accomplish nothing; against him no known enchantments

could prevail.  These facts were sure; regarding them there was

no doubt, no reason for doubt.  There was but one question: might

there be still other enchantments, _unknown_ to Merlin, which could

render Sir Sagramor's veil transparent to me, and make his enchanted

mail vulnerable to my weapons?  This was the one thing to be

decided in the lists.  Until then the world must remain in suspense.



So the world thought there was a vast matter at stake here, and

the world was right, but it was not the one they had in their

minds.  No, a far vaster one was upon the cast of this die:

_the life of knight-errantry_.  I was a champion, it was true, but

not the champion of the frivolous black arts, I was the champion

of hard unsentimental common-sense and reason.  I was entering

the lists to either destroy knight-errantry or be its victim.



Vast as the show-grounds were, there were no vacant spaces in them

outside of the lists, at ten o'clock on the morning of the 16th.

The mammoth grand-stand was clothed in flags, streamers, and rich

tapestries, and packed with several acres of small-fry tributary

kings, their suites, and the British aristocracy; with our own

royal gang in the chief place, and each and every individual

a flashing prism of gaudy silks and velvets--well, I never saw

anything to begin with it but a fight between an Upper Mississippi

sunset and the aurora borealis.  The huge camp of beflagged and

gay-colored tents at one end of the lists, with a stiff-standing

sentinel at every door and a shining shield hanging by him for

challenge, was another fine sight.  You see, every knight was

there who had any ambition or any caste feeling; for my feeling

toward their order was not much of a secret, and so here was their

chance.  If I won my fight with Sir Sagramor, others would have

the right to call me out as long as I might be willing to respond.



Down at our end there were but two tents; one for me, and another

for my servants.  At the appointed hour the king made a sign, and

the heralds, in their tabards, appeared and made proclamation,

naming the combatants and stating the cause of quarrel.  There

was a pause, then a ringing bugle-blast, which was the signal for

us to come forth.  All the multitude caught their breath, and

an eager curiosity flashed into every face.



Out from his tent rode great Sir Sagramor, an imposing tower

of iron, stately and rigid, his huge spear standing upright in its

socket and grasped in his strong hand, his grand horse's face and

breast cased in steel, his body clothed in rich trappings that

almost dragged the ground--oh, a most noble picture.  A great

shout went up, of welcome and admiration.



And then out I came.  But I didn't get any shout.  There was

a wondering and eloquent silence for a moment, then a great wave

of laughter began to sweep along that human sea, but a warning

bugle-blast cut its career short.  I was in the simplest and

comfortablest of gymnast costumes--flesh-colored tights from neck

to heel, with blue silk puffings about my loins, and bareheaded.

My horse was not above medium size, but he was alert, slender-limbed,

muscled with watchsprings, and just a greyhound to go.  He was

a beauty, glossy as silk, and naked as he was when he was born,

except for bridle and ranger-saddle.



The iron tower and the gorgeous bedquilt came cumbrously but

gracefully pirouetting down the lists, and we tripped lightly up

to meet them.  We halted; the tower saluted, I responded; then

we wheeled and rode side by side to the grand-stand and faced

our king and queen, to whom we made obeisance.  The queen exclaimed:



"Alack, Sir Boss, wilt fight naked, and without lance or sword or--"



But the king checked her and made her understand, with a polite

phrase or two, that this was none of her business.  The bugles

rang again; and we separated and rode to the ends of the lists,

and took position.  Now old Merlin stepped into view and cast

a dainty web of gossamer threads over Sir Sagramor which turned

him into Hamlet's ghost; the king made a sign, the bugles blew,

Sir Sagramor laid his great lance in rest, and the next moment here

he came thundering down the course with his veil flying out behind,

and I went whistling through the air like an arrow to meet him

--cocking my ear the while, as if noting the invisible knight's

position and progress by hearing, not sight.  A chorus of encouraging

shouts burst out for him, and one brave voice flung out a heartening

word for me--said:



"Go it, slim Jim!"



It was an even bet that Clarence had procured that favor for me

--and furnished the language, too.  When that formidable lance-point

was within a yard and a half of my breast I twitched my horse aside

without an effort, and the big knight swept by, scoring a blank.

I got plenty of applause that time.  We turned, braced up, and

down we came again.  Another blank for the knight, a roar of

applause for me.  This same thing was repeated once more; and

it fetched such a whirlwind of applause that Sir Sagramor lost his

temper, and at once changed his tactics and set himself the task

of chasing me down.  Why, he hadn't any show in the world at that;

it was a game of tag, with all the advantage on my side; I whirled

out of his path with ease whenever I chose, and once I slapped him

on the back as I went to the rear.  Finally I took the chase into

my own hands; and after that, turn, or twist, or do what he would,

he was never able to get behind me again; he found himself always

in front at the end of his maneuver.  So he gave up that business

and retired to his end of the lists.  His temper was clear gone now,

and he forgot himself and flung an insult at me which disposed

of mine.  I slipped my lasso from the horn of my saddle, and

grasped the coil in my right hand.  This time you should have seen

him come!--it was a business trip, sure; by his gait there was

blood in his eye.  I was sitting my horse at ease, and swinging

the great loop of my lasso in wide circles about my head; the

moment he was under way, I started for him; when the space between

us had narrowed to forty feet, I sent the snaky spirals of the rope

a-cleaving through the air, then darted aside and faced about and

brought my trained animal to a halt with all his feet braced under

him for a surge.  The next moment the rope sprang taut and yanked

Sir Sagramor out of the saddle!  Great Scott, but there was

a sensation!



Unquestionably, the popular thing in this world is novelty.  These

people had never seen anything of that cowboy business before,

and it carried them clear off their feet with delight.  From all

around and everywhere, the shout went up:



"Encore! encore!"



I wondered where they got the word, but there was no time to cipher

on philological matters, because the whole knight-errantry hive

was just humming now, and my prospect for trade couldn't have

been better.  The moment my lasso was released and Sir Sagramor

had been assisted to his tent, I hauled in the slack, took my

station and began to swing my loop around my head again.  I was

sure to have use for it as soon as they could elect a successor

for Sir Sagramor, and that couldn't take long where there were

so many hungry candidates.  Indeed, they elected one straight off

--Sir Hervis de Revel.



_Bzz_!  Here he came, like a house afire; I dodged: he passed like

a flash, with my horse-hair coils settling around his neck;

a second or so later, _fst_! his saddle was empty.



I got another encore; and another, and another, and still another.

When I had snaked five men out, things began to look serious to

the ironclads, and they stopped and consulted together.  As a

result, they decided that it was time to waive etiquette and send

their greatest and best against me.  To the astonishment of that

little world, I lassoed Sir Lamorak de Galis, and after him

Sir Galahad.  So you see there was simply nothing to be done now,

but play their right bower--bring out the superbest of the superb,

the mightiest of the mighty, the great Sir Launcelot himself!



A proud moment for me?  I should think so.  Yonder was Arthur,

King of Britain; yonder was Guenever; yes, and whole tribes of

little provincial kings and kinglets; and in the tented camp yonder,

renowned knights from many lands; and likewise the selectest body

known to chivalry, the Knights of the Table Round, the most

illustrious in Christendom; and biggest fact of all, the very sun

of their shining system was yonder couching his lance, the focal

point of forty thousand adoring eyes; and all by myself, here was

I laying for him.  Across my mind flitted the dear image of a

certain hello-girl of West Hartford, and I wished she could see

me now.  In that moment, down came the Invincible, with the rush

of a whirlwind--the courtly world rose to its feet and bent forward

--the fateful coils went circling through the air, and before you

could wink I was towing Sir Launcelot across the field on his

back, and kissing my hand to the storm of waving kerchiefs and

the thunder-crash of applause that greeted me!



Said I to myself, as I coiled my lariat and hung it on my saddle-horn,

and sat there drunk with glory, "The victory is perfect--no other

will venture against me--knight-errantry is dead."  Now imagine my

astonishment--and everybody else's, too--to hear the peculiar

bugle-call which announces that another competitor is about to

enter the lists!  There was a mystery here; I couldn't account for

this thing.  Next, I noticed Merlin gliding away from me; and then

I noticed that my lasso was gone!  The old sleight-of-hand expert

had stolen it, sure, and slipped it under his robe.



The bugle blew again.  I looked, and down came Sagramor riding

again, with his dust brushed off and his veil nicely re-arranged.

I trotted up to meet him, and pretended to find him by the sound

of his horse's hoofs.  He said:



"Thou'rt quick of ear, but it will not save thee from this!" and

he touched the hilt of his great sword.  "An ye are not able to see

it, because of the influence of the veil, know that it is no cumbrous

lance, but a sword--and I ween ye will not be able to avoid it."



His visor was up; there was death in his smile.  I should never

be able to dodge his sword, that was plain.  Somebody was going

to die this time.  If he got the drop on me, I could name the

corpse.  We rode forward together, and saluted the royalties.

This time the king was disturbed.  He said:



"Where is thy strange weapon?"



"It is stolen, sire."



"Hast another at hand?"



"No, sire, I brought only the one."



Then Merlin mixed in:



"He brought but the one because there was but the one to bring.

There exists none other but that one.  It belongeth to the king

of the Demons of the Sea.  This man is a pretender, and ignorant,

else he had known that that weapon can be used in but eight bouts

only, and then it vanisheth away to its home under the sea."



"Then is he weaponless," said the king.  "Sir Sagramore, ye will

grant him leave to borrow."



"And I will lend!" said Sir Launcelot, limping up.  "He is as

brave a knight of his hands as any that be on live, and he shall

have mine."



He put his hand on his sword to draw it, but Sir Sagramor said:



"Stay, it may not be.  He shall fight with his own weapons; it

was his privilege to choose them and bring them.  If he has erred,

on his head be it."



"Knight!" said the king.  "Thou'rt overwrought with passion; it

disorders thy mind.  Wouldst kill a naked man?"



"An he do it, he shall answer it to me," said Sir Launcelot.



"I will answer it to any he that desireth!" retorted Sir Sagramor hotly.



Merlin broke in, rubbing his hands and smiling his lowdownest

smile of malicious gratification:



"'Tis well said, right well said!  And 'tis enough of parleying,

let my lord the king deliver the battle signal."



The king had to yield.  The bugle made proclamation, and we turned

apart and rode to our stations.  There we stood, a hundred yards

apart, facing each other, rigid and motionless, like horsed statues.

And so we remained, in a soundless hush, as much as a full minute,

everybody gazing, nobody stirring.  It seemed as if the king could

not take heart to give the signal.  But at last he lifted his hand,

the clear note of the bugle followed, Sir Sagramor's long blade

described a flashing curve in the air, and it was superb to see him

come.  I sat still.  On he came.  I did not move.  People got so

excited that they shouted to me:



"Fly, fly!  Save thyself!  This is murther!"



I never budged so much as an inch till that thundering apparition

had got within fifteen paces of me; then I snatched a dragoon

revolver out of my holster, there was a flash and a roar, and

the revolver was back in the holster before anybody could tell

what had happened.



Here was a riderless horse plunging by, and yonder lay Sir Sagramor,

stone dead.



The people that ran to him were stricken dumb to find that the life

was actually gone out of the man and no reason for it visible,

no hurt upon his body, nothing like a wound.  There was a hole

through the breast of his chain-mail, but they attached no importance

to a little thing like that; and as a bullet wound there produces

but little blood, none came in sight because of the clothing and

swaddlings under the armor.  The body was dragged over to let

the king and the swells look down upon it.  They were stupefied

with astonishment naturally.  I was requested to come and explain

the miracle.  But I remained in my tracks, like a statue, and said:



"If it is a command, I will come, but my lord the king knows that

I am where the laws of combat require me to remain while any desire

to come against me."



I waited.  Nobody challenged.  Then I said:



"If there are any who doubt that this field is well and fairly won,

I do not wait for them to challenge me, I challenge them."



"It is a gallant offer," said the king, "and well beseems you.

Whom will you name first?"



"I name none, I challenge all!  Here I stand, and dare the chivalry

of England to come against me--not by individuals, but in mass!"



"What!" shouted a score of knights.



"You have heard the challenge.  Take it, or I proclaim you recreant

knights and vanquished, every one!"



It was a "bluff" you know.  At such a time it is sound judgment

to put on a bold face and play your hand for a hundred times what

it is worth; forty-nine times out of fifty nobody dares to "call,"

and you rake in the chips.  But just this once--well, things looked

squally!  In just no time, five hundred knights were scrambling

into their saddles, and before you could wink a widely scattering

drove were under way and clattering down upon me.  I snatched

both revolvers from the holsters and began to measure distances

and calculate chances.



Bang!  One saddle empty.  Bang! another one.  Bang--bang, and

I bagged two.  Well, it was nip and tuck with us, and I knew it.

If I spent the eleventh shot without convincing these people,

the twelfth man would kill me, sure.  And so I never did feel

so happy as I did when my ninth downed its man and I detected

the wavering in the crowd which is premonitory of panic.  An instant

lost now could knock out my last chance.  But I didn't lose it.

I raised both revolvers and pointed them--the halted host stood

their ground just about one good square moment, then broke and fled.



The day was mine.  Knight-errantry was a doomed institution.  The

march of civilization was begun.  How did I feel?  Ah, you never

could imagine it.



And Brer Merlin?  His stock was flat again.  Somehow, every time

the magic of fol-de-rol tried conclusions with the magic of science,

the magic of fol-de-rol got left.







CHAPTER XL



THREE YEARS LATER



When I broke the back of knight-errantry that time, I no longer

felt obliged to work in secret.  So, the very next day I exposed

my hidden schools, my mines, and my vast system of clandestine

factories and workshops to an astonished world.  That is to say,

I exposed the nineteenth century to the inspection of the sixth.



Well, it is always a good plan to follow up an advantage promptly.

The knights were temporarily down, but if I would keep them so

I must just simply paralyze them--nothing short of that would

answer.  You see, I was "bluffing" that last time in the field;

it would be natural for them to work around to that conclusion,

if I gave them a chance.  So I must not give them time; and I didn't.



I renewed my challenge, engraved it on brass, posted it up where

any priest could read it to them, and also kept it standing in

the advertising columns of the paper.



I not only renewed it, but added to its proportions.  I said,

name the day, and I would take fifty assistants and stand up

_against the massed chivalry of the whole earth and destroy it_.



I was not bluffing this time.  I meant what I said; I could do

what I promised.  There wasn't any way to misunderstand the language

of that challenge.  Even the dullest of the chivalry perceived

that this was a plain case of "put up, or shut up."  They were

wise and did the latter.  In all the next three years they gave

me no trouble worth mentioning.



Consider the three years sped.  Now look around on England.  A happy

and prosperous country, and strangely altered.  Schools everywhere,

and several colleges; a number of pretty good newspapers.  Even

authorship was taking a start; Sir Dinadan the Humorist was first

in the field, with a volume of gray-headed jokes which I had been

familiar with during thirteen centuries.  If he had left out that

old rancid one about the lecturer I wouldn't have said anything;

but I couldn't stand that one.  I suppressed the book and hanged

the author.



Slavery was dead and gone; all men were equal before the law;

taxation had been equalized.  The telegraph, the telephone, the

phonograph, the typewriter, the sewing-machine, and all the thousand

willing and handy servants of steam and electricity were working

their way into favor.  We had a steamboat or two on the Thames,

we had steam warships, and the beginnings of a steam commercial

marine; I was getting ready to send out an expedition to discover

America.



We were building several lines of railway, and our line from

Camelot to London was already finished and in operation.  I was

shrewd enough to make all offices connected with the passenger

service places of high and distinguished honor.  My idea was

to attract the chivalry and nobility, and make them useful and keep

them out of mischief.  The plan worked very well, the competition

for the places was hot.  The conductor of the 4.33 express was

a duke; there wasn't a passenger conductor on the line below

the degree of earl.  They were good men, every one, but they had

two defects which I couldn't cure, and so had to wink at: they

wouldn't lay aside their armor, and they would "knock down" fare

--I mean rob the company.



There was hardly a knight in all the land who wasn't in some useful

employment.  They were going from end to end of the country in all

manner of useful missionary capacities; their penchant for wandering,

and their experience in it, made them altogether the most effective

spreaders of civilization we had.  They went clothed in steel and

equipped with sword and lance and battle-axe, and if they couldn't

persuade a person to try a sewing-machine on the installment plan,

or a melodeon, or a barbed-wire fence, or a prohibition journal,

or any of the other thousand and one things they canvassed for,

they removed him and passed on.



I was very happy.  Things were working steadily toward a secretly

longed-for point.  You see, I had two schemes in my head which

were the vastest of all my projects.  The one was to overthrow the

Catholic Church and set up the Protestant faith on its ruins

--not as an Established Church, but a go-as-you-please one; and

the other project was to get a decree issued by and by, commanding

that upon Arthur's death unlimited suffrage should be introduced,

and given to men and women alike--at any rate to all men, wise

or unwise, and to all mothers who at middle age should be found

to know nearly as much as their sons at twenty-one.  Arthur was

good for thirty years yet, he being about my own age--that is

to say, forty--and I believed that in that time I could easily

have the active part of the population of that day ready and eager

for an event which should be the first of its kind in the history

of the world--a rounded and complete governmental revolution

without bloodshed.  The result to be a republic.  Well, I may

as well confess, though I do feel ashamed when I think of it:

I was beginning to have a base hankering to be its first president

myself.  Yes, there was more or less human nature in me; I found

that out.



Clarence was with me as concerned the revolution, but in a modified

way.  His idea was a republic, without privileged orders, but with

a hereditary royal family at the head of it instead of an elective

chief magistrate.  He believed that no nation that had ever known

the joy of worshiping a royal family could ever be robbed of it

and not fade away and die of melancholy.  I urged that kings were

dangerous.  He said, then have cats.  He was sure that a royal

family of cats would answer every purpose.  They would be as useful

as any other royal family, they would know as much, they would

have the same virtues and the same treacheries, the same disposition

to get up shindies with other royal cats, they would be laughably

vain and absurd and never know it, they would be wholly inexpensive;

finally, they would have as sound a divine right as any other

royal house, and "Tom VII, or Tom XI, or Tom XIV by the grace

of God King," would sound as well as it would when applied to

the ordinary royal tomcat with tights on.  "And as a rule," said

he, in his neat modern English, "the character of these cats would

be considerably above the character of the average king, and this

would be an immense moral advantage to the nation, for the reason

that a nation always models its morals after its monarch's.  The

worship of royalty being founded in unreason, these graceful and

harmless cats would easily become as sacred as any other royalties,

and indeed more so, because it would presently be noticed that

they hanged nobody, beheaded nobody, imprisoned nobody, inflicted

no cruelties or injustices of any sort, and so must be worthy of

a deeper love and reverence than the customary human king, and

would certainly get it.  The eyes of the whole harried world would

soon be fixed upon this humane and gentle system, and royal butchers

would presently begin to disappear; their subjects would fill

the vacancies with catlings from our own royal house; we should

become a factory; we should supply the thrones of the world; within

forty years all Europe would be governed by cats, and we should

furnish the cats.  The reign of universal peace would begin then,

to end no more forever....  Me-e-e-yow-ow-ow-ow--fzt!--wow!"



Hang him, I supposed he was in earnest, and was beginning to be

persuaded by him, until he exploded that cat-howl and startled me

almost out of my clothes.  But he never could be in earnest.  He

didn't know what it was.  He had pictured a distinct and perfectly

rational and feasible improvement upon constitutional monarchy,

but he was too feather-headed to know it, or care anything about

it, either.  I was going to give him a scolding, but Sandy came

flying in at that moment, wild with terror, and so choked with sobs

that for a minute she could not get her voice.  I ran and took her

in my arms, and lavished caresses upon her and said, beseechingly:



"Speak, darling, speak!  What is it?"



Her head fell limp upon my bosom, and she gasped, almost inaudibly:



"HELLO-CENTRAL!"



"Quick!" I shouted to Clarence; "telephone the king's homeopath

to come!"



In two minutes I was kneeling by the child's crib, and Sandy was

dispatching servants here, there, and everywhere, all over the

palace.  I took in the situation almost at a glance--membranous

croup!  I bent down and whispered:



"Wake up, sweetheart!  Hello-Central."



She opened her soft eyes languidly, and made out to say:



"Papa."



That was a comfort.  She was far from dead yet.  I sent for

preparations of sulphur, I rousted out the croup-kettle myself;

for I don't sit down and wait for doctors when Sandy or the child

is sick.  I knew how to nurse both of them, and had had experience.

This little chap had lived in my arms a good part of its small life,

and often I could soothe away its troubles and get it to laugh

through the tear-dews on its eye-lashes when even its mother couldn't.



Sir Launcelot, in his richest armor, came striding along the great

hall now on his way to the stock-board; he was president of the

stock-board, and occupied the Siege Perilous, which he had bought

of Sir Galahad; for the stock-board consisted of the Knights of

the Round Table, and they used the Round Table for business purposes

now.  Seats at it were worth--well, you would never believe the

figure, so it is no use to state it.  Sir Launcelot was a bear, and

he had put up a corner in one of the new lines, and was just getting

ready to squeeze the shorts to-day; but what of that?  He was

the same old Launcelot, and when he glanced in as he was passing

the door and found out that his pet was sick, that was enough

for him; bulls and bears might fight it out their own way for all

him, he would come right in here and stand by little Hello-Central

for all he was worth.  And that was what he did.  He shied his

helmet into the corner, and in half a minute he had a new wick

in the alcohol lamp and was firing up on the croup-kettle.  By this

time Sandy had built a blanket canopy over the crib, and everything

was ready.



Sir Launcelot got up steam, he and I loaded up the kettle with

unslaked lime and carbolic acid, with a touch of lactic acid added

thereto, then filled the thing up with water and inserted the

steam-spout under the canopy.  Everything was ship-shape now,

and we sat down on either side of the crib to stand our watch.

Sandy was so grateful and so comforted that she charged a couple

of church-wardens with willow-bark and sumach-tobacco for us,

and told us to smoke as much as we pleased, it couldn't get under

the canopy, and she was used to smoke, being the first lady in the

land who had ever seen a cloud blown.  Well, there couldn't be

a more contented or comfortable sight than Sir Launcelot in his

noble armor sitting in gracious serenity at the end of a yard

of snowy church-warden.  He was a beautiful man, a lovely man,

and was just intended to make a wife and children happy.  But, of

course Guenever--however, it's no use to cry over what's done and

can't be helped.



Well, he stood watch-and-watch with me, right straight through,

for three days and nights, till the child was out of danger; then

he took her up in his great arms and kissed her, with his plumes

falling about her golden head, then laid her softly in Sandy's

lap again and took his stately way down the vast hall, between

the ranks of admiring men-at-arms and menials, and so disappeared.

And no instinct warned me that I should never look upon him again

in this world!  Lord, what a world of heart-break it is.



The doctors said we must take the child away, if we would coax

her back to health and strength again.  And she must have sea-air.

So we took a man-of-war, and a suite of two hundred and sixty

persons, and went cruising about, and after a fortnight of this we

stepped ashore on the French coast, and the doctors thought it

would be a good idea to make something of a stay there.  The little

king of that region offered us his hospitalities, and we were glad

to accept.  If he had had as many conveniences as he lacked, we

should have been plenty comfortable enough; even as it was, we

made out very well, in his queer old castle, by the help of comforts

and luxuries from the ship.



At the end of a month I sent the vessel home for fresh supplies,

and for news.  We expected her back in three or four days.  She

would bring me, along with other news, the result of a certain

experiment which I had been starting.  It was a project of mine

to replace the tournament with something which might furnish an

escape for the extra steam of the chivalry, keep those bucks

entertained and out of mischief, and at the same time preserve

the best thing in them, which was their hardy spirit of emulation.

I had had a choice band of them in private training for some time,

and the date was now arriving for their first public effort.



This experiment was baseball.  In order to give the thing vogue

from the start, and place it out of the reach of criticism, I chose

my nines by rank, not capacity.  There wasn't a knight in either

team who wasn't a sceptered sovereign.  As for material of this

sort, there was a glut of it always around Arthur.  You couldn't

throw a brick in any direction and not cripple a king.  Of course,

I couldn't get these people to leave off their armor; they wouldn't

do that when they bathed.  They consented to differentiate the

armor so that a body could tell one team from the other, but that

was the most they would do.  So, one of the teams wore chain-mail

ulsters, and the other wore plate-armor made of my new Bessemer

steel.  Their practice in the field was the most fantastic thing I

ever saw.  Being ball-proof, they never skipped out of the way,

but stood still and took the result; when a Bessemer was at the bat

and a ball hit him, it would bound a hundred and fifty yards

sometimes.  And when a man was running, and threw himself on his

stomach to slide to his base, it was like an iron-clad coming into

port.  At first I appointed men of no rank to act as umpires, but

I had to discontinue that.  These people were no easier to please

than other nines.  The umpire's first decision was usually his

last; they broke him in two with a bat, and his friends toted him

home on a shutter.  When it was noticed that no umpire ever survived

a game, umpiring got to be unpopular.  So I was obliged to appoint

somebody whose rank and lofty position under the government would

protect him.



Here are the names of the nines:



     BESSEMERS                   ULSTERS



   KING ARTHUR.                EMPEROR LUCIUS.

   KING LOT OF LOTHIAN.        KING LOGRIS.

   KING OF NORTHGALIS.         KING MARHALT OF IRELAND.

   KING MARSIL.                KING MORGANORE.

   KING OF LITTLE BRITAIN.     KING MARK OF CORNWALL.

   KING LABOR.                 KING NENTRES OF GARLOT.

   KING PELLAM OF LISTENGESE.  KING MELIODAS OF LIONES.

   KING BAGDEMAGUS.            KING OF THE LAKE.

   KING TOLLEME LA FEINTES.    THE SOWDAN OF SYRIA.



                  Umpire--CLARENCE.



The first public game would certainly draw fifty thousand people;

and for solid fun would be worth going around the world to see.

Everything would be favorable; it was balmy and beautiful spring

weather now, and Nature was all tailored out in her new clothes.







CHAPTER XLI



THE INTERDICT



However, my attention was suddenly snatched from such matters;

our child began to lose ground again, and we had to go to sitting

up with her, her case became so serious.  We couldn't bear to allow

anybody to help in this service, so we two stood watch-and-watch,

day in and day out.  Ah, Sandy, what a right heart she had, how

simple, and genuine, and good she was!  She was a flawless wife

and mother; and yet I had married her for no other particular

reasons, except that by the customs of chivalry she was my property

until some knight should win her from me in the field.  She had

hunted Britain over for me; had found me at the hanging-bout

outside of London, and had straightway resumed her old place at

my side in the placidest way and as of right.  I was a New Englander,

and in my opinion this sort of partnership would compromise her,

sooner or later.  She couldn't see how, but I cut argument short

and we had a wedding.



Now I didn't know I was drawing a prize, yet that was what I did

draw.  Within the twelvemonth I became her worshiper; and ours

was the dearest and perfectest comradeship that ever was.  People

talk about beautiful friendships between two persons of the same

sex.  What is the best of that sort, as compared with the friendship

of man and wife, where the best impulses and highest ideals of

both are the same?  There is no place for comparison between

the two friendships; the one is earthly, the other divine.



In my dreams, along at first, I still wandered thirteen centuries

away, and my unsatisfied spirit went calling and harking all up

and down the unreplying vacancies of a vanished world.  Many a

time Sandy heard that imploring cry come from my lips in my sleep.

With a grand magnanimity she saddled that cry of mine upon our

child, conceiving it to be the name of some lost darling of mine.

It touched me to tears, and it also nearly knocked me off my feet,

too, when she smiled up in my face for an earned reward, and played

her quaint and pretty surprise upon me:



"The name of one who was dear to thee is here preserved, here made

holy, and the music of it will abide alway in our ears.  Now

thou'lt kiss me, as knowing the name I have given the child."



But I didn't know it, all the same.  I hadn't an idea in the

world; but it would have been cruel to confess it and spoil her

pretty game; so I never let on, but said:



"Yes, I know, sweetheart--how dear and good it is of you, too!

But I want to hear these lips of yours, which are also mine, utter

it first--then its music will be perfect."



Pleased to the marrow, she murmured:



"HELLO-CENTRAL!"



I didn't laugh--I am always thankful for that--but the strain

ruptured every cartilage in me, and for weeks afterward I could

hear my bones clack when I walked.  She never found out her mistake.

The first time she heard that form of salute used at the telephone

she was surprised, and not pleased; but I told her I had given

order for it: that henceforth and forever the telephone must

always be invoked with that reverent formality, in perpetual honor

and remembrance of my lost friend and her small namesake.  This

was not true.  But it answered.



Well, during two weeks and a half we watched by the crib, and in

our deep solicitude we were unconscious of any world outside of

that sick-room.  Then our reward came: the center of the universe

turned the corner and began to mend.  Grateful?  It isn't the term.

There _isn't_ any term for it.  You know that yourself, if you've

watched your child through the Valley of the Shadow and seen it

come back to life and sweep night out of the earth with one

all-illuminating smile that you could cover with your hand.



Why, we were back in this world in one instant!  Then we looked

the same startled thought into each other's eyes at the same

moment; more than two weeks gone, and that ship not back yet!



In another minute I appeared in the presence of my train.  They

had been steeped in troubled bodings all this time--their faces

showed it.  I called an escort and we galloped five miles to a

hilltop overlooking the sea.  Where was my great commerce that

so lately had made these glistening expanses populous and beautiful

with its white-winged flocks?  Vanished, every one!  Not a sail,

from verge to verge, not a smoke-bank--just a dead and empty

solitude, in place of all that brisk and breezy life.



I went swiftly back, saying not a word to anybody.  I told Sandy

this ghastly news.  We could imagine no explanation that would

begin to explain.  Had there been an invasion? an earthquake?

a pestilence?  Had the nation been swept out of existence?  But

guessing was profitless.  I must go--at once.  I borrowed the king's

navy--a "ship" no bigger than a steam launch--and was soon ready.



The parting--ah, yes, that was hard.  As I was devouring the child

with last kisses, it brisked up and jabbered out its vocabulary!

--the first time in more than two weeks, and it made fools of us

for joy.  The darling mispronunciations of childhood!--dear me,

there's no music that can touch it; and how one grieves when it

wastes away and dissolves into correctness, knowing it will never

visit his bereaved ear again.  Well, how good it was to be able

to carry that gracious memory away with me!



I approached England the next morning, with the wide highway of

salt water all to myself.  There were ships in the harbor, at

Dover, but they were naked as to sails, and there was no sign

of life about them.  It was Sunday; yet at Canterbury the streets

were empty; strangest of all, there was not even a priest in sight,

and no stroke of a bell fell upon my ear.  The mournfulness of

death was everywhere.  I couldn't understand it.  At last, in

the further edge of that town I saw a small funeral procession

--just a family and a few friends following a coffin--no priest;

a funeral without bell, book, or candle; there was a church there

close at hand, but they passed it by weeping, and did not enter it;

I glanced up at the belfry, and there hung the bell, shrouded in

black, and its tongue tied back.  Now I knew!  Now I understood

the stupendous calamity that had overtaken England.  Invasion?

Invasion is a triviality to it.  It was the INTERDICT!



I asked no questions; I didn't need to ask any.  The Church had

struck; the thing for me to do was to get into a disguise, and

go warily.  One of my servants gave me a suit of clothes, and

when we were safe beyond the town I put them on, and from that time

I traveled alone; I could not risk the embarrassment of company.



A miserable journey.  A desolate silence everywhere.  Even in

London itself.  Traffic had ceased; men did not talk or laugh, or

go in groups, or even in couples; they moved aimlessly about, each

man by himself, with his head down, and woe and terror at his heart.

The Tower showed recent war-scars.  Verily, much had been happening.



Of course, I meant to take the train for Camelot.  Train!  Why,

the station was as vacant as a cavern.  I moved on.  The journey

to Camelot was a repetition of what I had already seen.  The Monday

and the Tuesday differed in no way from the Sunday.  I arrived

far in the night.  From being the best electric-lighted town in

the kingdom and the most like a recumbent sun of anything you ever

saw, it was become simply a blot--a blot upon darkness--that is

to say, it was darker and solider than the rest of the darkness,

and so you could see it a little better; it made me feel as if

maybe it was symbolical--a sort of sign that the Church was going to

_keep_ the upper hand now, and snuff out all my beautiful civilization

just like that.  I found no life stirring in the somber streets.

I groped my way with a heavy heart.  The vast castle loomed black

upon the hilltop, not a spark visible about it.  The drawbridge

was down, the great gate stood wide, I entered without challenge,

my own heels making the only sound I heard--and it was sepulchral

enough, in those huge vacant courts.







CHAPTER XLII



WAR!



I found Clarence alone in his quarters, drowned in melancholy;

and in place of the electric light, he had reinstituted the ancient

rag-lamp, and sat there in a grisly twilight with all curtains

drawn tight.  He sprang up and rushed for me eagerly, saying:



"Oh, it's worth a billion milrays to look upon a live person again!"



He knew me as easily as if I hadn't been disguised at all.  Which

frightened me; one may easily believe that.



"Quick, now, tell me the meaning of this fearful disaster," I said.

"How did it come about?"



"Well, if there hadn't been any Queen Guenever, it wouldn't have

come so early; but it would have come, anyway.  It would have

come on your own account by and by; by luck, it happened to come

on the queen's."



"_And_ Sir Launcelot's?"



"Just so."



"Give me the details."



"I reckon you will grant that during some years there has been

only one pair of eyes in these kingdoms that has not been looking

steadily askance at the queen and Sir Launcelot--"



"Yes, King Arthur's."



"--and only one heart that was without suspicion--"



"Yes--the king's; a heart that isn't capable of thinking evil

of a friend."



"Well, the king might have gone on, still happy and unsuspecting,

to the end of his days, but for one of your modern improvements

--the stock-board.  When you left, three miles of the London,

Canterbury and Dover were ready for the rails, and also ready and

ripe for manipulation in the stock-market.  It was wildcat, and

everybody knew it.  The stock was for sale at a give-away.  What

does Sir Launcelot do, but--"



"Yes, I know; he quietly picked up nearly all of it for a song;

then he bought about twice as much more, deliverable upon call;

and he was about to call when I left."



"Very well, he did call.  The boys couldn't deliver.  Oh, he had

them--and he just settled his grip and squeezed them.  They were

laughing in their sleeves over their smartness in selling stock

to him at 15 and 16 and along there that wasn't worth 10.  Well,

when they had laughed long enough on that side of their mouths,

they rested-up that side by shifting the laugh to the other side.

That was when they compromised with the Invincible at 283!"



"Good land!"



"He skinned them alive, and they deserved it--anyway, the whole

kingdom rejoiced.  Well, among the flayed were Sir Agravaine and

Sir Mordred, nephews to the king.  End of the first act.  Act

second, scene first, an apartment in Carlisle castle, where the

court had gone for a few days' hunting.  Persons present, the

whole tribe of the king's nephews.  Mordred and Agravaine propose

to call the guileless Arthur's attention to Guenever and Sir

Launcelot.  Sir Gawaine, Sir Gareth, and Sir Gaheris will have

nothing to do with it.  A dispute ensues, with loud talk; in the

midst of it enter the king.  Mordred and Agravaine spring their

devastating tale upon him.  _Tableau_.  A trap is laid for Launcelot,

by the king's command, and Sir Launcelot walks into it.  He made

it sufficiently uncomfortable for the ambushed witnesses--to wit,

Mordred, Agravaine, and twelve knights of lesser rank, for he

killed every one of them but Mordred; but of course that couldn't

straighten matters between Launcelot and the king, and didn't."



"Oh, dear, only one thing could result--I see that.  War, and

the knights of the realm divided into a king's party and a

Sir Launcelot's party."



"Yes--that was the way of it.  The king sent the queen to the

stake, proposing to purify her with fire.  Launcelot and his

knights rescued her, and in doing it slew certain good old friends

of yours and mine--in fact, some of the best we ever had; to wit,

Sir Belias le Orgulous, Sir Segwarides, Sir Griflet le Fils de Dieu,

Sir Brandiles, Sir Aglovale--"



"Oh, you tear out my heartstrings."



"--wait, I'm not done yet--Sir Tor, Sir Gauter, Sir Gillimer--"



"The very best man in my subordinate nine.  What a handy right-fielder

he was!"



"--Sir Reynold's three brothers, Sir Damus, Sir Priamus, Sir Kay

the Stranger--"



"My peerless short-stop!  I've seen him catch a daisy-cutter in

his teeth.  Come, I can't stand this!"



"--Sir Driant, Sir Lambegus, Sir Herminde, Sir Pertilope,

Sir Perimones, and--whom do you think?"



"Rush!  Go on."



"Sir Gaheris, and Sir Gareth--both!"



"Oh, incredible!  Their love for Launcelot was indestructible."



"Well, it was an accident.  They were simply onlookers; they were

unarmed, and were merely there to witness the queen's punishment.

Sir Launcelot smote down whoever came in the way of his blind fury,

and he killed these without noticing who they were.  Here is an

instantaneous photograph one of our boys got of the battle; it's

for sale on every news-stand.  There--the figures nearest the queen

are Sir Launcelot with his sword up, and Sir Gareth gasping his

latest breath.  You can catch the agony in the queen's face through

the curling smoke.  It's a rattling battle-picture."



"Indeed, it is.  We must take good care of it; its historical value

is incalculable.  Go on."



"Well, the rest of the tale is just war, pure and simple.  Launcelot

retreated to his town and castle of Joyous Gard, and gathered

there a great following of knights.  The king, with a great host,

went there, and there was desperate fighting during several days,

and, as a result, all the plain around was paved with corpses

and cast-iron.  Then the Church patched up a peace between Arthur

and Launcelot and the queen and everybody--everybody but Sir Gawaine.

He was bitter about the slaying of his brothers, Gareth and Gaheris,

and would not be appeased.  He notified Launcelot to get him

thence, and make swift preparation, and look to be soon attacked.

So Launcelot sailed to his Duchy of Guienne with his following, and

Gawaine soon followed with an army, and he beguiled Arthur to go

with him.  Arthur left the kingdom in Sir Mordred's hands until

you should return--"



"Ah--a king's customary wisdom!"



"Yes.  Sir Mordred set himself at once to work to make his kingship

permanent.  He was going to marry Guenever, as a first move; but

she fled and shut herself up in the Tower of London.  Mordred

attacked; the Bishop of Canterbury dropped down on him with the

Interdict.  The king returned; Mordred fought him at Dover, at

Canterbury, and again at Barham Down.  Then there was talk of peace

and a composition.  Terms, Mordred to have Cornwall and Kent during

Arthur's life, and the whole kingdom afterward."



"Well, upon my word!  My dream of a republic to _be_ a dream, and

so remain."



"Yes.  The two armies lay near Salisbury.  Gawaine--Gawaine's head

is at Dover Castle, he fell in the fight there--Gawaine appeared to

Arthur in a dream, at least his ghost did, and warned him to

refrain from conflict for a month, let the delay cost what it might.

But battle was precipitated by an accident.  Arthur had given

order that if a sword was raised during the consultation over

the proposed treaty with Mordred, sound the trumpet and fall on!

for he had no confidence in Mordred.  Mordred had given a similar

order to _his_ people.  Well, by and by an adder bit a knight's heel;

the knight forgot all about the order, and made a slash at the

adder with his sword.  Inside of half a minute those two prodigious

hosts came together with a crash!  They butchered away all day.

Then the king--however, we have started something fresh since

you left--our paper has."



"No?  What is that?"



"War correspondence!"



"Why, that's good."



"Yes, the paper was booming right along, for the Interdict made

no impression, got no grip, while the war lasted.  I had war

correspondents with both armies.  I will finish that battle by

reading you what one of the boys says:



   'Then the king looked about him, and then was he

   ware of all his host and of all his good knights

   were left no more on live but two knights, that

   was Sir Lucan de Butlere, and his brother Sir

   Bedivere: and they were full sore wounded.  Jesu

   mercy, said the king, where are all my noble

   knights becomen?  Alas that ever I should see this

   doleful day.  For now, said Arthur, I am come to

   mine end.  But would to God that I wist where were

   that traitor Sir Mordred, that hath caused all

   this mischief.  Then was King Arthur ware where Sir

   Mordred leaned upon his sword among a great heap

   of dead men.  Now give me my spear, said Arthur

   unto Sir Lucan, for yonder I have espied the

   traitor that all this woe hath wrought.  Sir, let

   him be, said Sir Lucan, for he is unhappy; and if

   ye pass this unhappy day, ye shall be right well

   revenged upon him.  Good lord, remember ye of your

   night's dream, and what the spirit of Sir Gawaine

   told you this night, yet God of his great goodness

   hath preserved you hitherto.  Therefore, for God's

   sake, my lord, leave off by this. For blessed be

   God ye have won the field: for here we be three

   on live, and with Sir Mordred is none on live.

   And if ye leave off now, this wicked day of

   destiny is past.  Tide me death, betide me life,

   saith the king, now I see him yonder alone, he

   shall never escape mine hands, for at a better

   avail shall I never have him.  God speed you well,

   said Sir Bedivere.  Then the king gat his spear

   in both his hands, and ran toward Sir Mordred

   crying, Traitor, now is thy death day come.  And

   when Sir Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he ran until

   him with his sword drawn in his hand.  And then

   King Arthur smote Sir Mordred under the shield,

   with a foin of his spear throughout the body more

   than a fathom.  And when Sir Mordred felt that he

   had his death's wound, he thrust himself, with

   the might that he had, up to the butt of King

   Arthur's spear.  And right so he smote his father

   Arthur with his sword holden in both his hands,

   on the side of the head, that the sword pierced

   the helmet and the brain-pan, and therewithal

   Sir Mordred fell stark dead to the earth.  And

   the noble Arthur fell in a swoon to the earth,

   and there he swooned oft-times--'"



"That is a good piece of war correspondence, Clarence; you are

a first-rate newspaper man.  Well--is the king all right?  Did

he get well?"



"Poor soul, no.  He is dead."



I was utterly stunned; it had not seemed to me that any wound

could be mortal to him.



"And the queen, Clarence?"



"She is a nun, in Almesbury."



"What changes! and in such a short while.  It is inconceivable.

What next, I wonder?"



"I can tell you what next."



"Well?"



"Stake our lives and stand by them!"



"What do you mean by that?"



"The Church is master now.  The Interdict included you with Mordred;

it is not to be removed while you remain alive.  The clans are

gathering.  The Church has gathered all the knights that are left

alive, and as soon as you are discovered we shall have business

on our hands."



"Stuff!  With our deadly scientific war-material; with our hosts

of trained--"



"Save your breath--we haven't sixty faithful left!"



"What are you saying?  Our schools, our colleges, our vast

workshops, our--"



"When those knights come, those establishments will empty themselves

and go over to the enemy.  Did you think you had educated the

superstition out of those people?"



"I certainly did think it."



"Well, then, you may unthink it.  They stood every strain easily

--until the Interdict.  Since then, they merely put on a bold

outside--at heart they are quaking.  Make up your mind to it

--when the armies come, the mask will fall."



"It's hard news.  We are lost.  They will turn our own science

against us."



"No they won't."



"Why?"



"Because I and a handful of the faithful have blocked that game.

I'll tell you what I've done, and what moved me to it.  Smart as

you are, the Church was smarter.  It was the Church that sent

you cruising--through her servants, the doctors."



"Clarence!"



"It is the truth.  I know it.  Every officer of your ship was

the Church's picked servant, and so was every man of the crew."



"Oh, come!"



"It is just as I tell you.  I did not find out these things at once,

but I found them out finally.  Did you send me verbal information,

by the commander of the ship, to the effect that upon his return

to you, with supplies, you were going to leave Cadiz--"



"Cadiz!  I haven't been at Cadiz at all!"



"--going to leave Cadiz and cruise in distant seas indefinitely,

for the health of your family?  Did you send me that word?"



"Of course not.  I would have written, wouldn't I?"



"Naturally.  I was troubled and suspicious.  When the commander

sailed again I managed to ship a spy with him.  I have never

heard of vessel or spy since.  I gave myself two weeks to hear

from you in.  Then I resolved to send a ship to Cadiz.  There was

a reason why I didn't."



"What was that?"



"Our navy had suddenly and mysteriously disappeared!  Also, as

suddenly and as mysteriously, the railway and telegraph and

telephone service ceased, the men all deserted, poles were cut

down, the Church laid a ban upon the electric light!  I had to be

up and doing--and straight off.  Your life was safe--nobody in

these kingdoms but Merlin would venture to touch such a magician

as you without ten thousand men at his back--I had nothing to

think of but how to put preparations in the best trim against your

coming.  I felt safe myself--nobody would be anxious to touch

a pet of yours.  So this is what I did.  From our various works

I selected all the men--boys I mean--whose faithfulness under

whatsoever pressure I could swear to, and I called them together

secretly and gave them their instructions.  There are fifty-two of

them; none younger than fourteen, and none above seventeen years old."



"Why did you select boys?"



"Because all the others were born in an atmosphere of superstition

and reared in it.  It is in their blood and bones.  We imagined

we had educated it out of them; they thought so, too; the Interdict

woke them up like a thunderclap!  It revealed them to themselves,

and it revealed them to me, too.  With boys it was different.  Such

as have been under our training from seven to ten years have had

no acquaintance with the Church's terrors, and it was among these

that I found my fifty-two.  As a next move, I paid a private visit

to that old cave of Merlin's--not the small one--the big one--"



"Yes, the one where we secretly established our first great electric

plant when I was projecting a miracle."



"Just so.  And as that miracle hadn't become necessary then,

I thought it might be a good idea to utilize the plant now.  I've

provisioned the cave for a siege--"



"A good idea, a first-rate idea."



"I think so.  I placed four of my boys there as a guard--inside,

and out of sight.  Nobody was to be hurt--while outside; but any

attempt to enter--well, we said just let anybody try it!  Then

I went out into the hills and uncovered and cut the secret wires

which connected your bedroom with the wires that go to the dynamite

deposits under all our vast factories, mills, workshops, magazines,

etc., and about midnight I and my boys turned out and connected

that wire with the cave, and nobody but you and I suspects where

the other end of it goes to.  We laid it under ground, of course, and

it was all finished in a couple of hours or so.  We sha'n't have

to leave our fortress now when we want to blow up our civilization."



"It was the right move--and the natural one; military necessity,

in the changed condition of things.  Well, what changes _have_ come!

We expected to be besieged in the palace some time or other, but

--however, go on."



"Next, we built a wire fence."



"Wire fence?"



"Yes.  You dropped the hint of it yourself, two or three years ago."



"Oh, I remember--the time the Church tried her strength against

us the first time, and presently thought it wise to wait for a

hopefuler season.  Well, how have you arranged the fence?"



"I start twelve immensely strong wires--naked, not insulated

--from a big dynamo in the cave--dynamo with no brushes except

a positive and a negative one--"



"Yes, that's right."



"The wires go out from the cave and fence in a circle of level

ground a hundred yards in diameter; they make twelve independent

fences, ten feet apart--that is to say, twelve circles within

circles--and their ends come into the cave again."



"Right; go on."



"The fences are fastened to heavy oaken posts only three feet apart,

and these posts are sunk five feet in the ground."



"That is good and strong."



"Yes.  The wires have no ground-connection outside of the cave.

They go out from the positive brush of the dynamo; there is a

ground-connection through the negative brush; the other ends of

the wire return to the cave, and each is grounded independently."



"No, no, that won't do!"



"Why?"



"It's too expensive--uses up force for nothing.  You don't want

any ground-connection except the one through the negative brush.

The other end of every wire must be brought back into the cave

and fastened independently, and _without_ any ground-connection.

Now, then, observe the economy of it.  A cavalry charge hurls

itself against the fence; you are using no power, you are spending

no money, for there is only one ground-connection till those horses

come against the wire; the moment they touch it they form a

connection with the negative brush _through the ground_, and drop

dead.  Don't you see?--you are using no energy until it is needed;

your lightning is there, and ready, like the load in a gun; but

it isn't costing you a cent till you touch it off.  Oh, yes, the

single ground-connection--"



"Of course!  I don't know how I overlooked that.  It's not only

cheaper, but it's more effectual than the other way, for if wires

break or get tangled, no harm is done."



"No, especially if we have a tell-tale in the cave and disconnect

the broken wire.  Well, go on.  The gatlings?"



"Yes--that's arranged.  In the center of the inner circle, on a

spacious platform six feet high, I've grouped a battery of thirteen

gatling guns, and provided plenty of ammunition."



"That's it.  They command every approach, and when the Church's

knights arrive, there's going to be music.  The brow of the

precipice over the cave--"



"I've got a wire fence there, and a gatling.  They won't drop any

rocks down on us."



"Well, and the glass-cylinder dynamite torpedoes?"



"That's attended to.  It's the prettiest garden that was ever

planted.  It's a belt forty feet wide, and goes around the outer

fence--distance between it and the fence one hundred yards--kind of

neutral ground that space is.  There isn't a single square yard

of that whole belt but is equipped with a torpedo.  We laid them

on the surface of the ground, and sprinkled a layer of sand over

them.  It's an innocent looking garden, but you let a man start

in to hoe it once, and you'll see."



"You tested the torpedoes?"



"Well, I was going to, but--"



"But what?  Why, it's an immense oversight not to apply a--"



"Test?  Yes, I know; but they're all right; I laid a few in the

public road beyond our lines and they've been tested."



"Oh, that alters the case.  Who did it?"



"A Church committee."



"How kind!"



"Yes.  They came to command us to make submission.  You see they

didn't really come to test the torpedoes; that was merely an incident."



"Did the committee make a report?"



"Yes, they made one.  You could have heard it a mile."



"Unanimous?"



"That was the nature of it.  After that I put up some signs, for the

protection of future committees, and we have had no intruders since."



"Clarence, you've done a world of work, and done it perfectly."



"We had plenty of time for it; there wasn't any occasion for hurry."



We sat silent awhile, thinking.  Then my mind was made up, and

I said:



"Yes, everything is ready; everything is shipshape, no detail is

wanting.  I know what to do now."



"So do I; sit down and wait."



"No, _sir_! rise up and _strike_!"



"Do you mean it?"



"Yes, indeed!  The _de_fensive isn't in my line, and the _of_fensive

is.  That is, when I hold a fair hand--two-thirds as good a hand

as the enemy.  Oh, yes, we'll rise up and strike; that's our game."



"A hundred to one you are right.  When does the performance begin?"



"_Now!_  We'll proclaim the Republic."



"Well, that _will_ precipitate things, sure enough!"



"It will make them buzz, I tell you!  England will be a hornets'

nest before noon to-morrow, if the Church's hand hasn't lost its

cunning--and we know it hasn't.  Now you write and I'll dictate thus:



                      "PROCLAMATION



                           ---



   "BE IT KNOWN UNTO ALL.  Whereas the king having died

   and left no heir, it becomes my duty to continue the

   executive authority vested in me, until a government

   shall have been created and set in motion.  The

   monarchy has lapsed, it no longer exists.  By

   consequence, all political power has reverted to its

   original source, the people of the nation.  With the

   monarchy, its several adjuncts died also; wherefore

   there is no longer a nobility, no longer a privileged

   class, no longer an Established Church; all men are

   become exactly equal; they are upon one common

   level, and religion is free.  _A Republic is hereby

   proclaimed_, as being the natural estate of a nation

   when other authority has ceased.  It is the duty of

   the British people to meet together immediately,

   and by their votes elect representatives and deliver

   into their hands the government."



I signed it "The Boss," and dated it from Merlin's Cave.

Clarence said--



"Why, that tells where we are, and invites them to call right away."



"That is the idea.  We _strike_--by the Proclamation--then it's

their innings.  Now have the thing set up and printed and posted,

right off; that is, give the order; then, if you've got a couple

of bicycles handy at the foot of the hill, ho for Merlin's Cave!"



"I shall be ready in ten minutes.  What a cyclone there is going

to be to-morrow when this piece of paper gets to work!...  It's a

pleasant old palace, this is; I wonder if we shall ever again

--but never mind about that."







CHAPTER XLIII



THE BATTLE OF THE SAND BELT



In Merlin's Cave-- Clarence and I and fifty-two fresh, bright,

well-educated, clean-minded young British boys.  At dawn I sent

an order to the factories and to all our great works to stop

operations and remove all life to a safe distance, as everything

was going to be blown up by secret mines, "_and no telling at what

moment--therefore, vacate at once_."  These people knew me, and

had confidence in my word.  They would clear out without waiting

to part their hair, and I could take my own time about dating the

explosion.  You couldn't hire one of them to go back during the

century, if the explosion was still impending.



We had a week of waiting.  It was not dull for me, because I was

writing all the time.  During the first three days, I finished

turning my old diary into this narrative form; it only required

a chapter or so to bring it down to date.  The rest of the week

I took up in writing letters to my wife.  It was always my habit

to write to Sandy every day, whenever we were separate, and now

I kept up the habit for love of it, and of her, though I couldn't

do anything with the letters, of course, after I had written them.

But it put in the time, you see, and was almost like talking;

it was almost as if I was saying, "Sandy, if you and Hello-Central

were here in the cave, instead of only your photographs, what

good times we could have!"  And then, you know, I could imagine

the baby goo-gooing something out in reply, with its fists in its

mouth and itself stretched across its mother's lap on its back,

and she a-laughing and admiring and worshipping, and now and then

tickling under the baby's chin to set it cackling, and then maybe

throwing in a word of answer to me herself--and so on and so on

--well, don't you know, I could sit there in the cave with my pen,

and keep it up, that way, by the hour with them.  Why, it was

almost like having us all together again.



I had spies out every night, of course, to get news.  Every report

made things look more and more impressive.  The hosts were gathering,

gathering; down all the roads and paths of England the knights were

riding, and priests rode with them, to hearten these original

Crusaders, this being the Church's war.  All the nobilities, big

and little, were on their way, and all the gentry.  This was all

as was expected.  We should thin out this sort of folk to such

a degree that the people would have nothing to do but just step

to the front with their republic and--



Ah, what a donkey I was!  Toward the end of the week I began to get

this large and disenchanting fact through my head: that the mass

of the nation had swung their caps and shouted for the republic for

about one day, and there an end!  The Church, the nobles, and

the gentry then turned one grand, all-disapproving frown upon them

and shriveled them into sheep!  From that moment the sheep had

begun to gather to the fold--that is to say, the camps--and offer

their valueless lives and their valuable wool to the "righteous

cause."  Why, even the very men who had lately been slaves were

in the "righteous cause," and glorifying it, praying for it,

sentimentally slabbering over it, just like all the other commoners.

Imagine such human muck as this; conceive of this folly!



Yes, it was now "Death to the Republic!" everywhere--not a dissenting

voice.  All England was marching against us!  Truly, this was more

than I had bargained for.



I watched my fifty-two boys narrowly; watched their faces, their

walk, their unconscious attitudes: for all these are a language

--a language given us purposely that it may betray us in times of

emergency, when we have secrets which we want to keep.  I knew

that that thought would keep saying itself over and over again

in their minds and hearts, _All England is marching against us!_

and ever more strenuously imploring attention with each repetition,

ever more sharply realizing itself to their imaginations, until

even in their sleep they would find no rest from it, but hear

the vague and flitting creatures of the dreams say, _All England_

--ALL ENGLAND!--_is marching against you_!  I knew all this would

happen; I knew that ultimately the pressure would become so great

that it would compel utterance; therefore, I must be ready with an

answer at that time--an answer well chosen and tranquilizing.



I was right.  The time came.  They HAD to speak.  Poor lads, it

was pitiful to see, they were so pale, so worn, so troubled.  At

first their spokesman could hardly find voice or words; but he

presently got both.  This is what he said--and he put it in the

neat modern English taught him in my schools:



"We have tried to forget what we are--English boys!  We have tried

to put reason before sentiment, duty before love; our minds

approve, but our hearts reproach us.  While apparently it was

only the nobility, only the gentry, only the twenty-five or thirty

thousand knights left alive out of the late wars, we were of one

mind, and undisturbed by any troubling doubt; each and every one

of these fifty-two lads who stand here before you, said, 'They

have chosen--it is their affair.'  But think!--the matter is

altered--_All England is marching against us_!  Oh, sir, consider!

--reflect!--these people are our people, they are bone of our bone,

flesh of our flesh, we love them--do not ask us to destroy our nation!"



Well, it shows the value of looking ahead, and being ready for

a thing when it happens.  If I hadn't foreseen this thing and been

fixed, that boy would have had me!--I couldn't have said a word.

But I was fixed.  I said:



"My boys, your hearts are in the right place, you have thought the

worthy thought, you have done the worthy thing.  You are English

boys, you will remain English boys, and you will keep that name

unsmirched.  Give yourselves no further concern, let your minds be

at peace.  Consider this: while all England is marching against

us, who is in the van?  Who, by the commonest rules of war, will

march in the front?  Answer me."



"The mounted host of mailed knights."



"True.  They are thirty thousand strong.  Acres deep they will march.

Now, observe: none but _they_ will ever strike the sand-belt!  Then

there will be an episode!  Immediately after, the civilian multitude

in the rear will retire, to meet business engagements elsewhere.

None but nobles and gentry are knights, and _none but these_ will

remain to dance to our music after that episode.  It is absolutely

true that we shall have to fight nobody but these thirty thousand

knights.  Now speak, and it shall be as you decide.  Shall we

avoid the battle, retire from the field?"



"NO!!!"



The shout was unanimous and hearty.



"Are you--are you--well, afraid of these thirty thousand knights?"



That joke brought out a good laugh, the boys' troubles vanished

away, and they went gaily to their posts.  Ah, they were a darling

fifty-two!  As pretty as girls, too.



I was ready for the enemy now.  Let the approaching big day come

along--it would find us on deck.



The big day arrived on time.  At dawn the sentry on watch in the

corral came into the cave and reported a moving black mass under

the horizon, and a faint sound which he thought to be military

music.  Breakfast was just ready; we sat down and ate it.



This over, I made the boys a little speech, and then sent out

a detail to man the battery, with Clarence in command of it.



The sun rose presently and sent its unobstructed splendors over

the land, and we saw a prodigious host moving slowly toward us,

with the steady drift and aligned front of a wave of the sea.

Nearer and nearer it came, and more and more sublimely imposing

became its aspect; yes, all England was there, apparently.  Soon

we could see the innumerable banners fluttering, and then the sun

struck the sea of armor and set it all aflash.  Yes, it was a fine

sight; I hadn't ever seen anything to beat it.



At last we could make out details.  All the front ranks, no telling

how many acres deep, were horsemen--plumed knights in armor.

Suddenly we heard the blare of trumpets; the slow walk burst into

a gallop, and then--well, it was wonderful to see!  Down swept

that vast horse-shoe wave--it approached the sand-belt--my breath

stood still; nearer, nearer--the strip of green turf beyond the

yellow belt grew narrow--narrower still--became a mere ribbon in

front of the horses--then disappeared under their hoofs.  Great

Scott!  Why, the whole front of that host shot into the sky with

a thunder-crash, and became a whirling tempest of rags and fragments;

and along the ground lay a thick wall of smoke that hid what was

left of the multitude from our sight.



Time for the second step in the plan of campaign!  I touched

a button, and shook the bones of England loose from her spine!



In that explosion all our noble civilization-factories went up in

the air and disappeared from the earth.  It was a pity, but it

was necessary.  We could not afford to let the enemy turn our own

weapons against us.



Now ensued one of the dullest quarter-hours I had ever endured.

We waited in a silent solitude enclosed by our circles of wire,

and by a circle of heavy smoke outside of these.  We couldn't

see over the wall of smoke, and we couldn't see through it.  But

at last it began to shred away lazily, and by the end of another

quarter-hour the land was clear and our curiosity was enabled

to satisfy itself.  No living creature was in sight!  We now

perceived that additions had been made to our defenses.  The

dynamite had dug a ditch more than a hundred feet wide, all around

us, and cast up an embankment some twenty-five feet high on both

borders of it.  As to destruction of life, it was amazing.  Moreover,

it was beyond estimate.  Of course, we could not _count_ the dead,

because they did not exist as individuals, but merely as homogeneous

protoplasm, with alloys of iron and buttons.



No life was in sight, but necessarily there must have been some

wounded in the rear ranks, who were carried off the field under

cover of the wall of smoke; there would be sickness among the

others--there always is, after an episode like that.  But there

would be no reinforcements; this was the last stand of the chivalry

of England; it was all that was left of the order, after the recent

annihilating wars.  So I felt quite safe in believing that the

utmost force that could for the future be brought against us

would be but small; that is, of knights.  I therefore issued a

congratulatory proclamation to my army in these words:



   SOLDIERS, CHAMPIONS OF HUMAN LIBERTY AND EQUALITY:

   Your General congratulates you!  In the pride of his

   strength and the vanity of his renown, an arrogant

   enemy came against you.  You were ready.  The conflict

   was brief; on your side, glorious.  This mighty

   victory, having been achieved utterly without loss,

   stands without example in history.  So long as the

   planets shall continue to move in their orbits, the

   BATTLE OF THE SAND-BELT will not perish out of the

   memories of men.



                                THE BOSS.



I read it well, and the applause I got was very gratifying to me.

I then wound up with these remarks:



"The war with the English nation, as a nation, is at an end.

The nation has retired from the field and the war.  Before it can

be persuaded to return, war will have ceased.  This campaign is

the only one that is going to be fought.  It will be brief

--the briefest in history.  Also the most destructive to life,

considered from the standpoint of proportion of casualties to

numbers engaged.  We are done with the nation; henceforth we deal

only with the knights.  English knights can be killed, but they

cannot be conquered.  We know what is before us.  While one of

these men remains alive, our task is not finished, the war is not

ended.  We will kill them all."  [Loud and long continued applause.]



I picketed the great embankments thrown up around our lines by

the dynamite explosion--merely a lookout of a couple of boys

to announce the enemy when he should appear again.



Next, I sent an engineer and forty men to a point just beyond

our lines on the south, to turn a mountain brook that was there,

and bring it within our lines and under our command, arranging

it in such a way that I could make instant use of it in an emergency.

The forty men were divided into two shifts of twenty each, and

were to relieve each other every two hours.  In ten hours the

work was accomplished.



It was nightfall now, and I withdrew my pickets.  The one who

had had the northern outlook reported a camp in sight, but visible

with the glass only.  He also reported that a few knights had been

feeling their way toward us, and had driven some cattle across our

lines, but that the knights themselves had not come very near.

That was what I had been expecting.  They were feeling us, you

see; they wanted to know if we were going to play that red terror

on them again.  They would grow bolder in the night, perhaps.

I believed I knew what project they would attempt, because it was

plainly the thing I would attempt myself if I were in their places

and as ignorant as they were.  I mentioned it to Clarence.



"I think you are right," said he; "it is the obvious thing for

them to try."



"Well, then," I said, "if they do it they are doomed."



"Certainly."



"They won't have the slightest show in the world."



"Of course they won't."



"It's dreadful, Clarence.  It seems an awful pity."



The thing disturbed me so that I couldn't get any peace of mind

for thinking of it and worrying over it.  So, at last, to quiet

my conscience, I framed this message to the knights:



   TO THE HONORABLE THE COMMANDER OF THE INSURGENT

   CHIVALRY OF ENGLAND: YOU fight in vain.  We know

   your strength--if one may call it by that name.

   We know that at the utmost you cannot bring

   against us above five and twenty thousand knights.

   Therefore, you have no chance--none whatever.

   Reflect: we are well equipped, well fortified, we

   number 54.  Fifty-four what?  Men?  No, MINDS--the

   capablest in the world; a force against which

   mere animal might may no more hope to prevail than

   may the idle waves of the sea hope to prevail

   against the granite barriers of England.  Be advised.

   We offer you your lives; for the sake of your

   families, do not reject the gift.  We offer you

   this chance, and it is the last: throw down your

   arms; surrender unconditionally to the Republic,

   and all will be forgiven.



                          (Signed) THE BOSS.



I read it to Clarence, and said I proposed to send it by a flag

of truce.  He laughed the sarcastic laugh he was born with, and said:



"Somehow it seems impossible for you to ever fully realize what

these nobilities are.  Now let us save a little time and trouble.

Consider me the commander of the knights yonder.  Now, then,

you are the flag of truce; approach and deliver me your message,

and I will give you your answer."



I humored the idea.  I came forward under an imaginary guard of

the enemy's soldiers, produced my paper, and read it through.

For answer, Clarence struck the paper out of my hand, pursed up

a scornful lip and said with lofty disdain:



"Dismember me this animal, and return him in a basket to the

base-born knave who sent him; other answer have I none!"



How empty is theory in presence of fact!  And this was just fact,

and nothing else.  It was the thing that would have happened,

there was no getting around that.  I tore up the paper and granted

my mistimed sentimentalities a permanent rest.



Then, to business.  I tested the electric signals from the gatling

platform to the cave, and made sure that they were all right;

I tested and retested those which commanded the fences--these

were signals whereby I could break and renew the electric current

in each fence independently of the others at will.  I placed the

brook-connection under the guard and authority of three of my

best boys, who would alternate in two-hour watches all night and

promptly obey my signal, if I should have occasion to give it

--three revolver-shots in quick succession.  Sentry-duty was discarded

for the night, and the corral left empty of life; I ordered that

quiet be maintained in the cave, and the electric lights turned

down to a glimmer.



As soon as it was good and dark, I shut off the current from all

the fences, and then groped my way out to the embankment bordering

our side of the great dynamite ditch.  I crept to the top of it

and lay there on the slant of the muck to watch.  But it was

too dark to see anything.  As for sounds, there were none.  The

stillness was deathlike.  True, there were the usual night-sounds

of the country--the whir of night-birds, the buzzing of insects,

the barking of distant dogs, the mellow lowing of far-off kine

--but these didn't seem to break the stillness, they only intensified

it, and added a grewsome melancholy to it into the bargain.



I presently gave up looking, the night shut down so black, but

I kept my ears strained to catch the least suspicious sound, for

I judged I had only to wait, and I shouldn't be disappointed.

However, I had to wait a long time.  At last I caught what you

may call in distinct glimpses of sound dulled metallic sound.

I pricked up my ears, then, and held my breath, for this was the

sort of thing I had been waiting for.  This sound thickened, and

approached--from toward the north.  Presently, I heard it at my

own level--the ridge-top of the opposite embankment, a hundred

feet or more away.  Then I seemed to see a row of black dots appear

along that ridge--human heads?  I couldn't tell; it mightn't be

anything at all; you can't depend on your eyes when your imagination

is out of focus.  However, the question was soon settled.  I heard

that metallic noise descending into the great ditch.  It augmented

fast, it spread all along, and it unmistakably furnished me this

fact: an armed host was taking up its quarters in the ditch.  Yes,

these people were arranging a little surprise party for us.  We

could expect entertainment about dawn, possibly earlier.



I groped my way back to the corral now; I had seen enough.  I went

to the platform and signaled to turn the current on to the two

inner fences.  Then I went into the cave, and found everything

satisfactory there--nobody awake but the working-watch.  I woke

Clarence and told him the great ditch was filling up with men,

and that I believed all the knights were coming for us in a body.

It was my notion that as soon as dawn approached we could expect

the ditch's ambuscaded thousands to swarm up over the embankment

and make an assault, and be followed immediately by the rest

of their army.



Clarence said:



"They will be wanting to send a scout or two in the dark to make

preliminary observations.  Why not take the lightning off the

outer fences, and give them a chance?"



"I've already done it, Clarence.  Did you ever know me to be

inhospitable?"



"No, you are a good heart.  I want to go and--"



"Be a reception committee?  I will go, too."



We crossed the corral and lay down together between the two inside

fences.  Even the dim light of the cave had disordered our eyesight

somewhat, but the focus straightway began to regulate itself and

soon it was adjusted for present circumstances.  We had had to feel

our way before, but we could make out to see the fence posts now.

We started a whispered conversation, but suddenly Clarence broke

off and said:



"What is that?"



"What is what?"



"That thing yonder."



"What thing--where?"



"There beyond you a little piece--dark something--a dull shape

of some kind--against the second fence."



I gazed and he gazed.  I said:



"Could it be a man, Clarence?"



"No, I think not.  If you notice, it looks a lit--why, it _is_

a man!--leaning on the fence."



"I certainly believe it is; let us go and see."



We crept along on our hands and knees until we were pretty close,

and then looked up.  Yes, it was a man--a dim great figure in armor,

standing erect, with both hands on the upper wire--and, of course,

there was a smell of burning flesh.  Poor fellow, dead as a

door-nail, and never knew what hurt him.  He stood there like a

statue--no motion about him, except that his plumes swished about

a little in the night wind.  We rose up and looked in through

the bars of his visor, but couldn't make out whether we knew him

or not--features too dim and shadowed.



We heard muffled sounds approaching, and we sank down to the ground

where we were.  We made out another knight vaguely; he was coming

very stealthily, and feeling his way.  He was near enough now for

us to see him put out a hand, find an upper wire, then bend and

step under it and over the lower one.  Now he arrived at the

first knight--and started slightly when he discovered him.  He

stood a moment--no doubt wondering why the other one didn't move

on; then he said, in a low voice, "Why dreamest thou here, good

Sir Mar--" then he laid his hand on the corpse's shoulder--and just

uttered a little soft moan and sunk down dead.  Killed by a dead

man, you see--killed by a dead friend, in fact.  There was something

awful about it.



These early birds came scattering along after each other, about

one every five minutes in our vicinity, during half an hour.

They brought no armor of offense but their swords; as a rule,

they carried the sword ready in the hand, and put it forward and

found the wires with it.  We would now and then see a blue spark

when the knight that caused it was so far away as to be invisible

to us; but we knew what had happened, all the same; poor fellow,

he had touched a charged wire with his sword and been elected.

We had brief intervals of grim stillness, interrupted with piteous

regularity by the clash made by the falling of an iron-clad; and

this sort of thing was going on, right along, and was very creepy

there in the dark and lonesomeness.



We concluded to make a tour between the inner fences.  We elected

to walk upright, for convenience's sake; we argued that if discerned,

we should be taken for friends rather than enemies, and in any case

we should be out of reach of swords, and these gentry did not seem

to have any spears along.  Well, it was a curious trip.  Everywhere

dead men were lying outside the second fence--not plainly visible,

but still visible; and we counted fifteen of those pathetic

statues--dead knights standing with their hands on the upper wire.



One thing seemed to be sufficiently demonstrated: our current

was so tremendous that it killed before the victim could cry out.

Pretty soon we detected a muffled and heavy sound, and next moment

we guessed what it was.  It was a surprise in force coming! whispered

Clarence to go and wake the army, and notify it to wait in silence

in the cave for further orders.  He was soon back, and we stood

by the inner fence and watched the silent lightning do its awful

work upon that swarming host.  One could make out but little of

detail; but he could note that a black mass was piling itself up

beyond the second fence.  That swelling bulk was dead men!  Our

camp was enclosed with a solid wall of the dead--a bulwark,

a breastwork, of corpses, you may say.  One terrible thing about

this thing was the absence of human voices; there were no cheers,

no war cries; being intent upon a surprise, these men moved as

noiselessly as they could; and always when the front rank was near

enough to their goal to make it proper for them to begin to get

a shout ready, of course they struck the fatal line and went down

without testifying.



I sent a current through the third fence now; and almost immediately

through the fourth and fifth, so quickly were the gaps filled up.

I believed the time was come now for my climax; I believed that

that whole army was in our trap.  Anyway, it was high time to find

out.  So I touched a button and set fifty electric suns aflame

on the top of our precipice.



Land, what a sight!  We were enclosed in three walls of dead men!

All the other fences were pretty nearly filled with the living,

who were stealthily working their way forward through the wires.

The sudden glare paralyzed this host, petrified them, you may say,

with astonishment; there was just one instant for me to utilize

their immobility in, and I didn't lose the chance.  You see, in

another instant they would have recovered their faculties, then

they'd have burst into a cheer and made a rush, and my wires

would have gone down before it; but that lost instant lost them

their opportunity forever; while even that slight fragment of time

was still unspent, I shot the current through all the fences and

struck the whole host dead in their tracks!  _There_ was a groan

you could _hear_!  It voiced the death-pang of eleven thousand men.

It swelled out on the night with awful pathos.



A glance showed that the rest of the enemy--perhaps ten thousand

strong--were between us and the encircling ditch, and pressing

forward to the assault.  Consequently we had them _all!_ and had

them past help.  Time for the last act of the tragedy.  I fired

the three appointed revolver shots--which meant:



"Turn on the water!"



There was a sudden rush and roar, and in a minute the mountain

brook was raging through the big ditch and creating a river a

hundred feet wide and twenty-five deep.



"Stand to your guns, men!  Open fire!"



The thirteen gatlings began to vomit death into the fated ten

thousand.  They halted, they stood their ground a moment against

that withering deluge of fire, then they broke, faced about and

swept toward the ditch like chaff before a gale.  A full fourth

part of their force never reached the top of the lofty embankment;

the three-fourths reached it and plunged over--to death by drowning.



Within ten short minutes after we had opened fire, armed resistance

was totally annihilated, the campaign was ended, we fifty-four were

masters of England.  Twenty-five thousand men lay dead around us.



But how treacherous is fortune!  In a little while--say an hour

--happened a thing, by my own fault, which--but I have no heart

to write that.  Let the record end here.







CHAPTER XLIV



A POSTSCRIPT BY CLARENCE



I, Clarence, must write it for him.  He proposed that we two

go out and see if any help could be accorded the wounded.  I was

strenuous against the project.  I said that if there were many,

we could do but little for them; and it would not be wise for us to

trust ourselves among them, anyway.  But he could seldom be turned

from a purpose once formed; so we shut off the electric current

from the fences, took an escort along, climbed over the enclosing

ramparts of dead knights, and moved out upon the field.  The first

wounded mall who appealed for help was sitting with his back

against a dead comrade.  When The Boss bent over him and spoke

to him, the man recognized him and stabbed him.  That knight was

Sir Meliagraunce, as I found out by tearing off his helmet.  He

will not ask for help any more.



We carried The Boss to the cave and gave his wound, which was

not very serious, the best care we could.  In this service we had

the help of Merlin, though we did not know it.  He was disguised

as a woman, and appeared to be a simple old peasant goodwife.

In this disguise, with brown-stained face and smooth shaven, he

had appeared a few days after The Boss was hurt and offered to cook

for us, saying her people had gone off to join certain new camps

which the enemy were forming, and that she was starving.  The Boss

had been getting along very well, and had amused himself with

finishing up his record.



We were glad to have this woman, for we were short handed.  We

were in a trap, you see--a trap of our own making.  If we stayed

where we were, our dead would kill us; if we moved out of our

defenses, we should no longer be invincible.  We had conquered;

in turn we were conquered.  The Boss recognized this; we all

recognized it.  If we could go to one of those new camps and

patch up some kind of terms with the enemy--yes, but The Boss

could not go, and neither could I, for I was among the first that

were made sick by the poisonous air bred by those dead thousands.

Others were taken down, and still others.  To-morrow--



_To-morrow._  It is here.  And with it the end.  About midnight

I awoke, and saw that hag making curious passes in the air about

The Boss's head and face, and wondered what it meant.  Everybody

but the dynamo-watch lay steeped in sleep; there was no sound.

The woman ceased from her mysterious foolery, and started tip-toeing

toward the door.  I called out:



"Stop!  What have you been doing?"



She halted, and said with an accent of malicious satisfaction:



"Ye were conquerors; ye are conquered!  These others are perishing

--you also.  Ye shall all die in this place--every one--except _him_.

He sleepeth now--and shall sleep thirteen centuries.  I am Merlin!"



Then such a delirium of silly laughter overtook him that he reeled

about like a drunken man, and presently fetched up against one

of our wires.  His mouth is spread open yet; apparently he is still

laughing.  I suppose the face will retain that petrified laugh until

the corpse turns to dust.



The Boss has never stirred--sleeps like a stone.  If he does not

wake to-day we shall understand what kind of a sleep it is, and

his body will then be borne to a place in one of the remote recesses

of the cave where none will ever find it to desecrate it.  As for

the rest of us--well, it is agreed that if any one of us ever

escapes alive from this place, he will write the fact here, and

loyally hide this Manuscript with The Boss, our dear good chief,

whose property it is, be he alive or dead.







THE END OF THE MANUSCRIPT











FINAL P.S. BY M.T.



The dawn was come when I laid the Manuscript aside.  The rain

had almost ceased, the world was gray and sad, the exhausted storm

was sighing and sobbing itself to rest.  I went to the stranger's

room, and listened at his door, which was slightly ajar.  I could

hear his voice, and so I knocked.  There was no answer, but I still

heard the voice.  I peeped in.  The man lay on his back in bed,

talking brokenly but with spirit, and punctuating with his arms,

which he thrashed about, restlessly, as sick people do in delirium.

I slipped in softly and bent over him.  His mutterings and

ejaculations went on.  I spoke--merely a word, to call his attention.

His glassy eyes and his ashy face were alight in an instant with

pleasure, gratitude, gladness, welcome:



"Oh, Sandy, you are come at last--how I have longed for you!  Sit

by me--do not leave me--never leave me again, Sandy, never again.

Where is your hand?--give it me, dear, let me hold it--there

--now all is well, all is peace, and I am happy again--_we_ are happy

again, isn't it so, Sandy?  You are so dim, so vague, you are but

a mist, a cloud, but you are _here_, and that is blessedness sufficient;

and I have your hand; don't take it away--it is for only a little

while, I shall not require it long....  Was that the child?...

Hello-Central!... she doesn't answer.  Asleep, perhaps?  Bring her

when she wakes, and let me touch her hands, her face, her hair,

and tell her good-bye....  Sandy!  Yes, you are there.  I lost

myself a moment, and I thought you were gone....  Have I been

sick long?  It must be so; it seems months to me.  And such dreams!

such strange and awful dreams, Sandy!  Dreams that were as real

as reality--delirium, of course, but _so_ real!  Why, I thought

the king was dead, I thought you were in Gaul and couldn't get

home, I thought there was a revolution; in the fantastic frenzy

of these dreams, I thought that Clarence and I and a handful of

my cadets fought and exterminated the whole chivalry of England!

But even that was not the strangest.  I seemed to be a creature

out of a remote unborn age, centuries hence, and even _that_ was

as real as the rest!  Yes, I seemed to have flown back out of that

age into this of ours, and then forward to it again, and was set

down, a stranger and forlorn in that strange England, with an

abyss of thirteen centuries yawning between me and you! between

me and my home and my friends! between me and all that is dear

to me, all that could make life worth the living!  It was awful

--awfuler than you can ever imagine, Sandy.  Ah, watch by me, Sandy

--stay by me every moment--_don't_ let me go out of my mind again;

death is nothing, let it come, but not with those dreams, not with

the torture of those hideous dreams--I cannot endure _that_ again....

Sandy?..."



He lay muttering incoherently some little time; then for a time he

lay silent, and apparently sinking away toward death.  Presently

his fingers began to pick busily at the coverlet, and by that sign

I knew that his end was at hand with the first suggestion of the

death-rattle in his throat he started up slightly, and seemed

to listen: then he said:



"A bugle?...  It is the king!  The drawbridge, there!  Man the

battlements!--turn out the--"



He was getting up his last "effect"; but he never finished it.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's

Court, Complete, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)















THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT



by Mark Twain







1892





EXPLANATORY



The Colonel Mulberry Sellers here re-introduced to the public is the same

person who appeared as Eschol Sellers in the first edition of the tale

entitled "The Gilded Age," years ago, and as Beriah Sellers in the

subsequent editions of the same book, and finally as Mulberry Sellers in

the drama played afterward by John T. Raymond.



The name was changed from Eschol to Beriah to accommodate an Eschol

Sellers who rose up out of the vasty deeps of uncharted space and

preferred his request--backed by threat of a libel suit--then went his

way appeased, and came no more.  In the play Beriah had to be dropped to

satisfy another member of the race, and Mulberry was substituted in the

hope that the objectors would be tired by that time and let it pass

unchallenged.  So far it has occupied the field in peace; therefore we

chance it again, feeling reasonably safe, this time, under shelter of the

statute of limitations.



MARK TWAIN.

Hartford, 1891.













THE WEATHER IN THIS BOOK.



No weather will be found in this book.  This is an attempt to pull a book

through without weather.  It being the first attempt of the kind in

fictitious literature, it may prove a failure, but it seemed worth the

while of some dare-devil person to try it, and the author was in just the

mood.



Many a reader who wanted to read a tale through was not able to do it

because of delays on account of the weather.  Nothing breaks up an

author's progress like having to stop every few pages to fuss-up the

weather.  Thus it is plain that persistent intrusions of weather are bad

for both reader and author.



Of course weather is necessary to a narrative of human experience.

That is conceded.  But it ought to be put where it will not be in the

way; where it will not interrupt the flow of the narrative.  And it ought

to be the ablest weather that can be had, not ignorant, poor-quality,

amateur weather.  Weather is a literary specialty, and no untrained hand

can turn out a good article of it.  The present author can do only a few

trifling ordinary kinds of weather, and he cannot do those very good.

So it has seemed wisest to borrow such weather as is necessary for the

book from qualified and recognized experts--giving credit, of course.

This weather will be found over in the back part of the book, out of the

way.  See Appendix.  The reader is requested to turn over and help

himself from time to time as he goes along.









CHAPTER I.



It is a matchless morning in rural England.  On a fair hill we see a

majestic pile, the ivied walls and towers of Cholmondeley Castle, huge

relic and witness of the baronial grandeurs of the Middle Ages.  This is

one of the seats of the Earl of Rossmore, K. G. G. C. B. K. C. M. G.,

etc., etc., etc., etc., etc., who possesses twenty-two thousand acres of

English land, owns a parish in London with two thousand houses on its

lease-roll, and struggles comfortably along on an income of two hundred

thousand pounds a year.  The father and founder of this proud old line

was William the Conqueror his very self; the mother of it was not

inventoried in history by name, she being merely a random episode and

inconsequential, like the tanner's daughter of Falaise.



In a breakfast room of the castle on this breezy fine morning there are

two persons and the cooling remains of a deserted meal.  One of these

persons is the old lord, tall, erect, square-shouldered, white-haired,

stern-browed, a man who shows character in every feature, attitude, and

movement, and carries his seventy years as easily as most men carry

fifty.  The other person is his only son and heir, a dreamy-eyed young

fellow, who looks about twenty-six but is nearer thirty.  Candor,

kindliness, honesty, sincerity, simplicity, modesty--it is easy to see

that these are cardinal traits of his character; and so when you have

clothed him in the formidable components of his name, you somehow seem

to be contemplating a lamb in armor: his name and style being the

Honourable Kirkcudbright Llanover Marjorihanks Sellers Viscount-Berkeley,

of Cholmondeley Castle, Warwickshire.  (Pronounced K'koobry Thlanover

Marshbanks Sellers Vycount Barkly, of Chumly Castle, Warrikshr.) He is

standing by a great window, in an attitude suggestive of respectful

attention to what his father is saying and equally respectful dissent

from the positions and arguments offered.  The father walks the floor as

he talks, and his talk shows that his temper is away up toward summer

heat.



"Soft-spirited as you are, Berkeley, I am quite aware that when you have

once made up your mind to do a thing which your ideas of honor and

justice require you to do, argument and reason are (for the time being,)

wasted upon you--yes, and ridicule; persuasion, supplication, and command

as well.  To my mind--"



"Father, if you will look at it without prejudice, without passion, you

must concede that I am not doing a rash thing, a thoughtless, wilful

thing, with nothing substantial behind it to justify it.  I did not

create the American claimant to the earldom of Rossmore; I did not hunt

for him, did not find him, did not obtrude him upon your notice.

He found himself, he injected himself into our lives--"



"And has made mine a purgatory for ten years with his tiresome letters,

his wordy reasonings, his acres of tedious evidence,--"



"Which you would never read, would never consent to read.  Yet in common

fairness he was entitled to a hearing.  That hearing would either prove

he was the rightful earl--in which case our course would be plain--or it

would prove that he wasn't--in which case our course would be equally

plain.  I have read his evidences, my lord.  I have conned them well,

studied them patiently and thoroughly.  The chain seems to be complete,

no important link wanting.  I believe he is the rightful earl."



"And I a usurper--a--nameless pauper, a tramp!  Consider what you are

saying, sir."



"Father, if he is the rightful earl, would you, could you--that fact

being established--consent to keep his titles and his properties from him

a day, an hour, a minute?"



"You are talking nonsense--nonsense--lurid idiotcy!  Now, listen to me.

I will make a confession--if you wish to call it by that name.  I did not

read those evidences because I had no occasion to--I was made familiar

with them in the time of this claimant's father and of my own father

forty years ago.  This fellow's predecessors have kept mine more or less

familiar with them for close upon a hundred and fifty years.  The truth

is, the rightful heir did go to America, with the Fairfax heir or about

the same time--but disappeared--somewhere in the wilds of Virginia, got

married, end began to breed savages for the Claimant market; wrote no

letters home; was supposed to be dead; his younger brother softly took

possession; presently the American did die, and straightway his eldest

product put in his claim--by letter--letter still in existence--and died

before the uncle in-possession found time--or maybe inclination--to

--answer.  The infant son of that eldest product grew up--long interval,

you see--and he took to writing letters and furnishing evidences.  Well,

successor after successor has done the same, down to the present idiot.

It was a succession of paupers; not one of them was ever able to pay his

passage to England or institute suit.  The Fairfaxes kept their lordship

alive, and so they have never lost it to this day, although they live in

Maryland; their friend lost his by his own neglect.  You perceive now,

that the facts in this case bring us to precisely this result: morally

the American tramp is rightful earl of Rossmore; legally he has no more

right than his dog.  There now--are you satisfied?"



There was a pause, then the son glanced at the crest carved in the great

oaken mantel and said, with a regretful note in his voice:



"Since the introduction of heraldic symbols,--the motto of this house has

been 'Suum cuique'--to every man his own.  By your own intrepidly frank

confession, my lord, it is become a sarcasm: If Simon Lathers--"



Keep that exasperating name to yourself!  For ten years it has pestered

my eye--and tortured my ear; till at last my very footfalls time

themselves to the brain-racking rhythm of Simon Lathers!--Simon Lathers!

--Simon Lathers!  And now, to make its presence in my soul eternal,

immortal, imperishable, you have resolved to--to--what is it you have

resolved to do?"



"To go to Simon Lathers, in America, and change places with him."



"What?  Deliver the reversion of the earldom into his hands?"



"That is my purpose."



"Make this tremendous surrender without even trying the fantastic case in

the Lords?"



"Ye--s--" with hesitation and some embarrassment.



"By all that is amazing, I believe you are insane, my son.  See here

--have you been training with that ass again--that radical, if you prefer

the term, though the words are synonymous--Lord Tanzy, of Tollmache?"



The son did not reply, and the old lord continued:



"Yes, you confess.  That puppy, that shame to his birth and caste, who

holds all hereditary lordships and privilege to be usurpation, all

nobility a tinsel sham, all aristocratic institutions a fraud, all

inequalities in rank a legalized crime and an infamy, and no bread honest

bread that a man doesn't earn by his own work--work, pah!"--and the old

patrician brushed imaginary labor-dirt from his white hands.  "You have

come to hold just those opinions yourself, suppose,"--he added with a

sneer.



A faint flush in the younger man's cheek told that the shot had hit and

hurt; but he answered with dignity:



"I have.  I say it without shame--I feel none.  And now my reason for

resolving to renounce my heirship without resistance is explained.

I wish to retire from what to me is a false existence, a false position,

and begin my life over again--begin it right--begin it on the level of

mere manhood, unassisted by factitious aids, and succeed or fail by pure

merit or the want of it.  I will go to America, where all men are equal

and all have an equal chance; I will live or die, sink or swim, win or

lose as just a man--that alone, and not a single helping gaud or fiction

back of it."



"Hear, hear!"  The two men looked each other steadily in the eye a moment

or two, then the elder one added, musingly, "Ab-so-lutely

cra-zy-ab-solutely!"  After another silence, he said, as one who, long

troubled by clouds, detects a ray of sunshine, "Well, there will be one

satisfaction--Simon Lathets will come here to enter into his own, and I

will drown him in the horsepond.  That poor devil--always so humble in

his letters, so pitiful, so deferential; so steeped in reverence for our

great line and lofty-station; so anxious to placate us, so prayerful for

recognition as a relative, a bearer in his veins of our sacred blood

--and withal so poor, so needy, so threadbare and pauper-shod as to

raiment, so despised, so laughed at for his silly claimantship by the

lewd American scum around him--ah, the vulgar, crawling, insufferable

tramp!  To read one of his cringing, nauseating letters--well?"



This to a splendid flunkey, all in inflamed plush and buttons and

knee-breeches as to his trunk, and a glinting white frost-work of

ground-glass paste as to his head, who stood with his heels together and

the upper half of him bent forward, a salver in his hands:



"The letters, my lord."



My lord took them, and the servant disappeared.



"Among the rest, an American letter.  From the tramp, of course.  Jove,

but here's a change!  No brown paper envelope this time, filched from a

shop, and carrying the shop's advertisement in the corner.  Oh, no, a

proper enough envelope--with a most ostentatiously broad mourning

border--for his cat, perhaps, since he was a bachelor--and fastened with

red wax--a batch of it as big as a half-crown--and--and--our crest for a

seal!--motto and all.  And the ignorant, sprawling hand is gone; he

sports a secretary, evidently--a secretary with a most confident swing

and flourish to his pen.  Oh indeed, our fortunes are improving over

there--our meek tramp has undergone a metamorphosis."



"Read it, my lord, please."



"Yes, this time I will.  For the sake of the cat:



                                        14,042 SIXTEENTH.  STREET,

                                        WASHINGTON, May 2.



It is my painful duty to announce to you that the head of our illustrious

house is no more--The Right Honourable, The Most Noble, The Most Puissant

Simon Lathers Lord Rossmore having departed this life ("Gone at last

--this is unspeakably precious news, my son,") at his seat in the environs

of the hamlet of Duffy's Corners in the grand old State of Arkansas,

--and his twin brother with him, both being crushed by a log at a

smoke-house-raising, owing to carelessness on the part of all present,

referable to over-confidence and gaiety induced by overplus of

sour-mash--("Extolled be sour-mash, whatever that may be, eh Berkeley?")

five days ago, with no scion of our ancient race present to close his

eyes and inter him with the honors due his historic name and lofty

rank--in fact, he is on the ice yet, him and his brother--friends took a

collection for it.  But I shall take immediate occasion to have their

noble remains shipped to you ("Great heavens!") for interment, with due

ceremonies and solemnities, in the family vault or mausoleum of our

house.  Meantime I shall put up a pair of hatchments on my house-front,

and you will of course do the same at your several seats.



I have also to remind you that by this sad disaster I as sole heir,

inherit and become seized of all the titles, honors, lands, and goods of

our lamented relative, and must of necessity, painful as the duty is,

shortly require at the bar of the Lords restitution of these dignities

and properties, now illegally enjoyed by your titular lordship.



With assurance of my distinguished consideration and warm cousinly

regard, I remain

                         Your titular lordship's



                                   Most obedient servant,

                              Mulberry Sellers Earl Rossmore.



"Im-mense!  Come, this one's interesting.  Why, Berkeley, his breezy

impudence is--is--why, it's colossal, it's sublime."



"No, this one doesn't seem to cringe much."



"Cringe--why, he doesn't know the meaning of the word.  Hatchments!  To

commemorate that sniveling tramp and his, fraternal duplicate.  And he is

going to send me the remains.  The late Claimant was a fool, but plainly

this new one's a maniac.  What a name!  Mulberry Sellers--there's music

for you, Simon Lathers--Mulberry Sellers--Mulberry Sellers--Simon

Lathers.  Sounds like machinery working and churning.  Simon Lathers,

Mulberry Sel--Are you going?"



"If I have your leave, father."



The old gentleman stood musing some time, after his son was gone.  This

was his thought:



"He is a good boy, and lovable.  Let him take his own course--as it would

profit nothing to oppose him--make things worse, in fact.  My arguments

and his aunt's persuasions have failed; let us see what America can do

for us.  Let us see what equality and hard-times can effect for the

mental health of a brain-sick young British lord.  Going to renounce his

lordship and be a man!  Yas!"









CHAPTER II.



COLONEL MULBERRY SELLERS--this was some days before he wrote his letter

to Lord Rossmore--was seated in his "library," which was also his

"drawing-room" and was also his "picture gallery" and likewise his

"work-shop."  Sometimes he called it by one of these names, sometimes by

another, according to occasion and circumstance.  He was constructing

what seemed to be some kind of a frail mechanical toy; and was apparently

very much interested in his work.  He was a white-headed man, now, but

otherwise he was as young, alert, buoyant, visionary and enterprising as

ever.  His loving old wife sat near by, contentedly knitting and

thinking, with a cat asleep in her lap.  The room was large, light, and

had a comfortable look, in fact a home-like look, though the furniture

was of a humble sort and not over abundant, and the knickknacks and

things that go to adorn a living-room not plenty and not costly.  But

there were natural flowers, and there was an abstract and unclassifiable

something about the place which betrayed the presence in the house of

somebody with a happy taste and an effective touch.



Even the deadly chromos on the walls were somehow without offence;

in fact they seemed to belong there and to add an attraction to the room

--a fascination, anyway; for whoever got his eye on one of them was like

to gaze and suffer till he died--you have seen that kind of pictures.

Some of these terrors were landscapes, some libeled the sea, some were

ostensible portraits, all were crimes.  All the portraits were

recognizable as dead Americans of distinction, and yet, through labeling

added, by a daring hand, they were all doing duty here as "Earls of

Rossmore."  The newest one had left the works as Andrew Jackson, but was

doing its best now, as "Simon Lathers Lord Rossmore, Present Earl."

On one wall was a cheap old railroad map of Warwickshire.  This had been

newly labeled "The Rossmore Estates."  On the opposite wall was another

map, and this was the most imposing decoration of the establishment and

the first to catch a stranger's attention, because of its great size.

It had once borne simply the title SIBERIA; but now the word "FUTURE" had

been written in front of that word.  There were other additions, in red

ink--many cities, with great populations set down, scattered over the

vast-country at points where neither cities nor populations exist to-day.

One of these cities, with population placed at 1,500,000, bore the name

"Libertyorloffskoizalinski," and there was a still more populous one,

centrally located and marked "Capital," which bore the name

"Freedomolovnaivanovich."



The "mansion"--the Colonel's usual name for the house--was a rickety old

two-story frame of considerable size, which had been painted, some time

or other, but had nearly forgotten it.  It was away out in the ragged

edge of Washington and had once been somebody's country place.  It had a

neglected yard around it, with a paling fence that needed straightening

up, in places, and a gate that would stay shut.  By the door-post were

several modest tin signs.  "Col. Mulberry Sellers, Attorney at Law and

Claim Agent," was the principal one.  One learned from the others that

the Colonel was a Materializer, a Hypnotizer, a Mind-Cure dabbler; and so

on.  For he was a man who could always find things to do.



A white-headed negro man, with spectacles and damaged white cotton gloves

appeared in the presence, made a stately obeisance and announced:



"Marse Washington Hawkins, suh."



"Great Scott!  Show him in, Dan'l, show him in."



The Colonel and his wife were on their feet in a moment, and

the next moment were joyfully wringing the hands of a stoutish,

discouraged-looking man whose general aspect suggested that he was

fifty years old, but whose hair swore to a hundred.



"Well, well, well, Washington, my boy, it is good to look at you again.

Sit down, sit down, and make yourself at home.  There, now--why, you look

perfectly natural; aging a little, just a little, but you'd have known

him anywhere, wouldn't you, Polly?"



"Oh, yes, Berry, he's just like his pa would have looked if he'd lived.

Dear, dear, where have you dropped from?  Let me see, how long is it

since--"



I should say it's all of fifteen` years, Mrs.  Sellers."



"Well, well, how time does get away with us.  Yes, and oh, the changes

that--"



There was a sudden catch of her voice and a trembling of the lip, the men

waiting reverently for her to get command of herself and go on; but

after a little struggle she turned away, with her apron to her eyes, and

softly disappeared.



"Seeing you made her think of the children, poor thing--dear, dear,

they're all dead but the youngest.



"But banish care, it's no time for it now--on with the dance, let joy be

unconfined is my motto, whether there's any dance to dance; or any joy to

unconfine--you'll be the healthier for it every time,--every time,

Washington--it's my experience, and I've seen a good deal of this world.

Come--where have you disappeared to all these years, and are you from

there, now, or where are you from?"



"I don't quite think you would ever guess, Colonel.  Cherokee Strip."



"My land!"



"Sure as you live."



"You can't mean it.  Actually living out there?"



"Well, yes, if a body may call it that; though it's a pretty strong term

for 'dobies and jackass rabbits, boiled beans and slap-jacks, depression,

withered hopes, poverty in all its varieties--"



"Louise out there?"



"Yes, and the children."



"Out there now?"



"Yes, I couldn't afford to bring them with me."



"Oh, I see,--you had to come--claim against the government.  Make

yourself perfectly easy--I'll take care of that."



"But it isn't a claim against the government."



"No?  Want to be postmaster?  That's all right.  Leave it to me.  I'll

fix it."



"But it isn't postmaster--you're all astray yet."



"Well, good gracious, Washington, why don't you come out and tell me what

it is?  What, do you want to be so reserved and distrustful with an old

friend like me, for?  Don't you reckon I can keep a se--"



"There's no secret about it--you merely don't give me a chance to--"



"Now look here, old friend, I know the human race; and I know that when a

man comes to Washington, I don't care if it's from heaven, let alone

Cherokee-Strip, it's because he wants something.  And I know that as a

rule he's not going to get it; that he'll stay and try--for another thing

and won't get that; the same luck with the next and the next and the

next; and keeps on till he strikes bottom, and is too poor and ashamed to

go back, even to Cherokee Strip; and at last his heart breaks--and they

take up a collection and bury him.  There--don't interrupt me, I know

what I'm talking about.  Happy and prosperous in the Far West wasn't I?

You know that.  Principal citizen of Hawkeye, looked up to by everybody,

kind of an autocrat, actually a kind of an autocrat, Washington.  Well,

nothing would do but I must go Minister to St. James, the Governor and

everybody insisting, you know, and so at last I consented--no getting out

of it, had to do it, so here I came.  A day too late, Washington.  Think

of that--what little things change the world's history--yes, sir, the

place had been filled.  Well, there I was, you see.  I offered to

compromise and go to Paris.  The President was very sorry and all that,

but that place, you see, didn't belong to the West, so there I was again.

There was no help for it, so I had to stoop a little--we all reach the

day some time or other when we've got to do that, Washington, and it's

not a bad thing for us, either, take it by and large and all around

--I had to stoop a little and offer to take Constantinople.  Washington,

consider this--for it's perfectly true--within a month I asked for China;

within another month I begged for Japan; one year later I was away down,

down, down, supplicating with tears and anguish for the bottom office in

the gift of the government of the United States--Flint-Picker in the

cellars of the War Department.  And by George I didn't get it."



"Flint-Picker?"



"Yes.  Office established in the time of the Revolution, last century.

The musket-flints for the military posts were supplied from the capitol.

They do it yet; for although the flint-arm has gone out and the forts

have tumbled down, the decree hasn't been repealed--been overlooked and

forgotten, you see--and so the vacancies where old Ticonderoga and others

used to stand, still get their six quarts of gun-flints a year just the

same."



Washington said musingly after a pause:



"How strange it seems--to start for Minister to England at twenty

thousand a year and fail for flintpicker at--"



"Three dollars a week.  It's human life, Washington--just an epitome of

human ambition, and struggle, and the outcome: you aim for the palace and

get drowned in the sewer."



There was another meditative silence.  Then Washington said, with earnest

compassion in his voice--



"And so, after coming here, against your inclination, to satisfy your

sense of patriotic duty and appease a selfish public clamor, you get

absolutely nothing for it."



"Nothing?"  The Colonel had to get up and stand, to get room for his

amazement to expand.  "Nothing, Washington?  I ask you this: to be a

perpetual Member and the only Perpetual Member of a Diplomatic Body

accredited to the greatest country on earth do you call that nothing?"



It was Washington's turn to be amazed.  He was stricken dumb; but the

wide-eyed wonder, the reverent admiration expressed in his face were more

eloquent than any words could have been.  The Colonel's wounded spirit

was healed and he resumed his seat pleased and content.  He leaned

forward and said impressively:



"What was due to a man who had become forever conspicuous by an

experience without precedent in the history of the world?--a man made

permanently and diplomatically sacred, so to speak, by having been

connected, temporarily, through solicitation, with every single

diplomatic post in the roster of this government, from Envoy

Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the Court of St. James all

the way down to Consul to a guano rock in the Straits of Sunda--salary

payable in guano--which disappeared by volcanic convulsion the day before

they got down to my name in the list of applicants.  Certainly something

august enough to be answerable to the size of this unique and memorable

experience was my due, and I got it.  By the common voice of this

community, by acclamation of the people, that mighty utterance which

brushes aside laws and legislation, and from whose decrees there is no

appeal, I was named Perpetual Member of the Diplomatic Body representing

the multifarious sovereignties and civilizations of the globe near the

republican court of the United States of America.  And they brought me

home with a torchlight procession."



"It is wonderful, Colonel, simply wonderful."



"It's the loftiest official position in the whole earth."



"I should think so--and the most commanding."



"You have named the word.  Think of it.  I frown, and there is war; I

smile, and contending nations lay down their arms."



"It is awful.  The responsibility, I mean."



"It is nothing.  Responsibility is no burden to me; I am used to it; have

always been used to it."



"And the work--the work!  Do you have to attend all the sittings?"



"Who, I?  Does the Emperor of Russia attend the conclaves of the

governors of the provinces?  He sits at home, and indicates his

pleasure."



Washington was silent a moment, then a deep sigh escaped him.



"How proud I was an hour ago; how paltry seems my little promotion now!

Colonel, the reason I came to Washington is,--I am Congressional Delegate

from Cherokee Strip!"



The Colonel sprang to his feet and broke out with prodigious enthusiasm:



"Give me your hand, my boy--this is immense news!  I congratulate you

with all my heart.  My prophecies stand confirmed.  I always said it was

in you.  I always said you were born for high distinction and would

achieve it.  You ask Polly if I didn't."



Washington was dazed by this most unexpected demonstration.



"Why, Colonel, there's nothing to it.  That little narrow, desolate,

unpeopled, oblong streak of grass and gravel, lost in the remote wastes

of the vast continent--why, it's like representing a billiard table--a

discarded one."



"Tut-tut, it's a great, it's a staving preferment, and just opulent with

influence here."



"Shucks, Colonel, I haven't even a vote."



"That's nothing; you can make speeches."



"No, I can't.  The population's only two hundred--"



"That's all right, that's all right--"



"And they hadn't any right to elect me; we're not even a territory,

there's no Organic Act, the government hasn't any official knowledge of

us whatever."



"Never mind about that; I'll fix that.  I'll rush the thing through, I'll

get you organized in no time."



"Will you, Colonel?--it's too good of you; but it's just your old

sterling self, the same old ever-faithful friend," and the grateful tears

welled up in Washington's eyes.



"It's just as good as done, my boy, just as good as done.  Shake hands.

We'll hitch teams together, you and I, and we'll make things hum!"







CHAPTER III.



Mrs. Sellers returned, now, with her composure restored, and began to ask

after Hawkins's wife, and about his children, and the number of them, and

so on, and her examination of the witness resulted in a circumstantial

history of the family's ups and downs and driftings to and fro in the far

West during the previous fifteen years.  There was a message, now, from

out back, and Colonel Sellers went out there in answer to it.  Hawkins

took this opportunity to ask how the world had been using the Colonel

during the past half-generation.



"Oh, it's been using him just the same; it couldn't change its way of

using him if it wanted to, for he wouldn't let it."



"I can easily believe that, Mrs.  Sellers."



"Yes, you see, he doesn't change, himself--not the least little bit in

the world--he's always Mulberry Sellers."



"I can see that plain enough."



"Just the same old scheming, generous, good-hearted, moonshiny, hopeful,

no-account failure he always was, and still everybody likes him just as

well as if he was the shiningest success."



"They always did: and it was natural, because he was so obliging and

accommodating, and had something about him that made it kind of easy to

ask help of him, or favors--you didn't feel shy, you know, or have that

wish--you--didn't--have--to--try feeling that you have with other

people."



"It's just so, yet; and a body wonders at it, too, because he's been

shamefully treated, many times, by people that had used him for a ladder

to climb up by, and then kicked him down when they didn't need him any

more.  For a time you can see he's hurt, his pride's wounded, because he

shrinks away from that thing and don't want to talk about it--and so I

used to think now he's learned something and he'll be more careful

hereafter--but laws! in a couple of weeks he's forgotten all about it,

and any selfish tramp out of nobody knows where can come and put up a

poor mouth and walk right into his heart with his boots on."



"It must try your patience pretty sharply sometimes."



"Oh, no, I'm used to it; and I'd rather have him so than the other way.

When I call him a failure, I mean to the world he's a failure; he isn't

to me.  I don't know as I want him different much different, anyway.

I have to scold him some, snarl at him, you might even call it, but I

reckon I'd do that just the same, if he was different--it's my make.

But I'm a good deal less snarly and more contented when he's a failure

than I am when he isn't."



"Then he isn't always a failure," said Hawking, brightening.



"Him?  Oh, bless you, no.  He makes a strike, as he calls it, from time

to time.  Then's my time to fret and fuss.  For the money just flies

--first come first served.  Straight off, he loads up the house with

cripples and idiots and stray cats and all the different kinds of poor

wrecks that other people don't want and he does, and then when the

poverty comes again I've got to clear the most of them out or we'd

starve; and that distresses him, and me the same, of course.



"Here's old Dan'l and old Jinny, that the sheriff sold south one of the

times that we got bankrupted before the war--they came wandering back

after the peace, worn out and used up on the cotton plantations,

helpless, and not another lick of work left in their old hides for the

rest of this earthly pilgrimage--and we so pinched, oh so pinched for the

very crumbs to keep life in us, and he just flung the door wide, and the

way he received them you'd have thought they had come straight down from

heaven in answer to prayer.  I took him one side and said, 'Mulberry we

can't have them--we've nothing for ourselves--we can't feed them.'

He looked at me kind of hurt, and said, 'Turn them out?--and they've come

to me just as confident and trusting as--as--why Polly, I must have

bought that confidence sometime or other a long time ago, and given my

note, so to speak--you don't get such things as a gift--and how am I

going to go back on a debt like that?  And you see, they're so poor,

and old, and friendless, and--'  But I was ashamed by that time, and shut

him off, and somehow felt a new courage in me, and so I said, softly,

'We'll keep them--the Lord will provide.'  He was glad, and started to

blurt out one of those over-confident speeches of his, but checked

himself in time, and said humbly, 'I will, anyway.'  It was years and

years and years ago.  Well, you see those old wrecks are here yet."



"But don't they do your housework?"



"Laws!  The idea.  They would if they could, poor old things, and perhaps

they think they do do some of it.  But it's a superstition.  Dan'l waits

on the front door, and sometimes goes on an errand; and sometimes you'll

see one or both of them letting on to dust around in here--but that's

because there's something they want to hear about and mix their gabble

into.  And they're always around at meals, for the same reason.  But the

fact is, we have to keep a young negro girl just to take care of them,

and a negro woman to do the housework and help take care of them."



"Well, they ought to be tolerably happy, I should think."



"It's no name for it.  They quarrel together pretty much all the time

--most always about religion, because Dan'l's a Dunker Baptist and Jinny's

a shouting Methodist, and Jinny believes in special Providences and Dan'l

don't, because he thinks he's a kind of a free-thinker--and they play and

sing plantation hymns together, and talk and chatter just eternally and

forever, and are sincerely fond of each other and think the world of

Mulberry, and he puts up patiently with all their spoiled ways and

foolishness, and so--ah, well, they're happy enough if it comes to that.

And I don't mind--I've got used to it.  I can get used to anything, with

Mulberry to help; and the fact is, I don't much care what happens, so

long as he's spared to me."



"Well, here's to him, and hoping he'll make another strike soon."



"And rake in the lame, the halt and the blind, and turn the house into a

hospital again?  It's what he would do.  I've seen aplenty of that and

more.  No, Washington, I want his strikes to be mighty moderate ones the

rest of the way down the vale."



"Well, then, big strike or little strike, or no strike at all, here's

hoping he'll never lack for friends--and I don't reckon he ever will

while there's people around who know enough to--"



"Him lack for friends!" and she tilted her head up with a frank pride--

"why, Washington, you can't name a man that's anybody that isn't fond of

him.  I'll tell you privately, that I've had Satan's own time to keep

them from appointing him to some office or other.  They knew he'd no

business with an office, just as well as I did, but he's the hardest man

to refuse anything to, a body ever saw.  Mulberry Sellers with an office!

laws goodness, you know what that would be like.  Why, they'd come from

the ends of the earth to see a circus like that.  I'd just as lieves be

married to Niagara Falls, and done with it."  After a reflective pause

she added--having wandered back, in the interval, to the remark that had

been her text: "Friends?--oh, indeed, no man ever had more; and such

friends: Grant, Sherman, Sheridan, Johnston, Longstreet, Lee--many's the

time they've sat in that chair you're sitting in--" Hawkins was out of it

instantly, and contemplating it with a reverential surprise, and with the

awed sense of having trodden shod upon holy ground--



"They!" he said.



"Oh, indeed, yes, a many and a many a time."



He continued to gaze at the chair fascinated, magnetized; and for once in

his life that continental stretch of dry prairie which stood for his

imagination was afire, and across it was marching a slanting flamefront

that joined its wide horizons together and smothered the skies with

smoke.  He was experiencing what one or another drowsing, geographically

ignorant alien experiences every day in the year when he turns a dull and

indifferent eye out of the car window and it falls upon a certain

station-sign which reads "Stratford-on-Avon!" Mrs.  Sellers went

gossiping comfortably along:



"Oh, they like to hear him talk, especially if their load is getting

rather heavy on one shoulder and they want to shift it.  He's all air,

you know,--breeze, you may say--and he freshens them up; it's a trip to

the country, they say.  Many a time he's made General Grant laugh--and

that's a tidy job, I can tell you, and as for Sheridan, his eye lights up

and he listens to Mulberry Sellers the same as if he was artillery.

You see, the charm about Mulberry is, he is so catholic and unprejudiced

that he fits in anywhere and everywhere.  It makes him powerful good

company, and as popular as scandal.  You go to the White House when the

President's holding a general reception--sometime when Mulberry's there.

Why, dear me, you can't tell which of them it is that's holding that

reception."



"Well, he certainly is a remarkable man--and he always was.  Is he

religious?"



"Clear to his marrow--does more thinking and reading on that subject than

any other except Russia and Siberia: thrashes around over the whole

field, too; nothing bigoted about him."



"What is his religion?"



"He--" She stopped, and was lost for a moment or two in thinking, then

she said, with simplicity, "I think he was a Mohammedan or something last

week."



Washington started down town, now, to bring his trunk, for the hospitable

Sellerses would listen to no excuses; their house must be his home during

the session.  The Colonel returned presently and resumed work upon his

plaything.  It was finished when Washington got back.



"There it is," said the Colonel, "all finished."



"What is it for, Colonel?"



"Oh, it's just a trifle.  Toy to amuse the children."



Washington examined it.



"It seems to be a puzzle."



"Yes, that's what it is.  I call it Pigs in the Clover.  Put them in--see

if you can put them in the pen."



After many failures Washington succeeded, and was as pleased as a child.



"It's wonderfully ingenious, Colonel, it's ever so clever and

interesting--why, I could play with it all day.  What are you going to do

with it?"



"Oh, nothing.  Patent it and throw it aside."



"Don't you do anything of the kind.  There's money in that thing."



A compassionate look traveled over the Colonel's countenance, and he

said:



"Money--yes; pin money: a couple of hundred thousand, perhaps.  Not

more."



Washington's eyes blazed.



"A couple of hundred thousand dollars!  do you call that pin money?"



The colonel rose and tip-toed his way across the room, closed a door that

was slightly ajar, tip-toed his way to his seat again, and said, under

his breath:



"You can keep a secret?"



Washington nodded his affirmative, he was too awed to speak.



"You have heard of materialization--materialization of departed spirits?"



Washington had heard of it.



"And probably didn't believe in it; and quite right, too.  The thing as

practised by ignorant charlatans is unworthy of attention or respect--

where there's a dim light and a dark cabinet, and a parcel of sentimental

gulls gathered together, with their faith and their shudders and their

tears all ready, and one and the same fatty degeneration of protoplasm

and humbug comes out and materializes himself into anybody you want,

grandmother, grandchild, brother-in-law, Witch of Endor, John Milton,

Siamese twins, Peter the Great, and all such frantic nonsense--no, that

is all foolish and pitiful.  But when a man that is competent brings the

vast powers of science to bear, it's a different matter, a totally

different matter, you see.  The spectre that answers that call has come

to stay.  Do you note the commercial value of that detail?"



"Well, I--the--the truth is, that I don't quite know that I do.  Do you

mean that such, being permanent, not transitory, would give more general

satisfaction, and so enhance the price--of tickets to the show--"



"Show?  Folly--listen to me; and get a good grip on your breath, for you

are going to need it.  Within three days I shall have completed my

method, and then--let the world stand aghast, for it shall see marvels.

Washington, within three days--ten at the outside--you shall see me call

the dead of any century, and they will arise and walk.  Walk?--they shall

walk forever, and never die again.  Walk with all the muscle and spring

of their pristine vigor."



"Colonel!  Indeed it does take one's breath away."



"Now do you see the money that's in it?"



"I'm--well, I'm--not really sure that I do."



Great Scott, look here.  I shall have a monopoly; they'll all belong to

me, won't they?  Two thousand policemen in the city of New York.  Wages,

four dollars a day.  I'll replace them with dead ones at half the money.



"Oh, prodigious!  I never thought of that.  F-o-u-r thousand dollars a

day.  Now I do begin to see!  But will dead policemen answer?"



"Haven't they--up to this time?"



"Well, if you put it that way--"



"Put it any way you want to.  Modify it to suit yourself, and my lads

shall still be superior.  They won't eat, they won't drink--don't need

those things; they won't wink for cash at gambling dens and unlicensed

rum-holes, they won't spark the scullery maids; and moreover the bands of

toughs that ambuscade them on lonely beats, and cowardly shoot and knife

them will only damage the uniforms and not live long enough to get more

than a momentary satisfaction out of that."



"Why, Colonel, if you can furnish policemen, then of course--"



"Certainly--I can furnish any line of goods that's wanted.  Take the

army, for instance--now twenty-five thousand men; expense, twenty-two

millions a year.  I will dig up the Romans, I will resurrect the Greeks,

I will furnish the government, for ten millions a year, ten thousand

veterans drawn from the victorious legions of all the ages--soldiers that

will chase Indians year in and year out on materialized horses, and cost

never a cent for rations or repairs.  The armies of Europe cost two

billions a year now--I will replace them all for a billion.  I will dig

up the trained statesmen of all ages and all climes, and furnish this

country with a Congress that knows enough to come in out of the rain--

a thing that's never happened yet, since the Declaration of Independence,

and never will happen till these practically dead people are replaced

with the genuine article.  I will restock the thrones of Europe with the

best brains and the best morals that all the royal sepulchres of all the

centuries can furnish--which isn't promising very much--and I'll divide

the wages and the civil list, fair and square, merely taking my half

and--"



"Colonel, if the half of this is true, there's millions in it--millions."



"Billions in it--billions; that's what you mean.  Why, look here; the

thing is so close at hand, so imminent, so absolutely immediate, that if

a man were to come to me now and say, Colonel, I am a little short, and

if you could lend me a couple of billion dollars for--come in!"



This in answer to a knock.  An energetic looking man bustled in with a

big pocket-book in his hand, took a paper from it and presented it, with

the curt remark:



"Seventeenth and last call--you want to out with that three dollars and

forty cents this time without fail, Colonel Mulberry Sellers."



The Colonel began to slap this pocket and that one, and feel here and

there and everywhere, muttering:



"What have I done with that wallet?--let me see--um--not here, not there

--Oh, I must have left it in the kitchen; I'll just run and--"



"No you won't--you'll stay right where you are.  And you're going to

disgorge, too--this time."



Washington innocently offered to go and look.  When he was gone the

Colonel said:



"The fact is, I've got to throw myself on your indulgence just this once

more, Suggs; you see the remittances I was expecting--"



"Hang the remittances--it's too stale--it won't answer.  Come!"



The Colonel glanced about him in despair.  Then his face lighted; he ran

to the wall and began to dust off a peculiarly atrocious chromo with his

handkerchief.  Then he brought it reverently, offered it to the

collector, averted his face and said:



"Take it, but don't let me see it go.  It's the sole remaining Rembrandt

that--"



"Rembrandt be damned, it's a chromo."



"Oh, don't speak of it so, I beg you.  It's the only really great

original, the only supreme example of that mighty school of art which--"



"Art!  It's the sickest looking thing I--"



The colonel was already bringing another horror and tenderly dusting it.



"Take this one too--the gem of my collection--the only genuine Fra

Angelico that--"



"Illuminated liver-pad, that's what it is.  Give it here--good day--

people will think I've robbed a' nigger barber-shop."



As he slammed the door behind him the Colonel shouted with an anguished

accent--



"Do please cover them up--don't let the damp get at them.  The delicate

tints in the Angelico--"



But the man was gone.



Washington re-appeared and said he had looked everywhere, and so had Mrs.

Sellers and the servants, but in vain; and went on to say he wished he

could get his eye on a certain man about this time--no need to hunt up

that pocket-book then.  The Colonel's interest was awake at once.



"What man?"



"One-armed Pete they call him out there--out in the Cherokee country I

mean.  Robbed the bank in Tahlequah."



"Do they have banks in Tahlequah?"



"Yes--a bank, anyway.  He was suspected of robbing it.  Whoever did it

got away with more than twenty thousand dollars.  They offered a reward

of five thousand.  I believe I saw that very man, on my way east."



"No--is that so?



"I certainly saw a man on the train, the first day I struck the railroad,

that answered the description pretty exactly--at least as to clothes and

a lacking arm."



"Why don't you get him arrested and claim the reward?"



"I couldn't.  I had to get a requisition, of course.  But I meant to stay

by him till I got my chance."



"Well?"



"Well, he left the train during the night some time."



"Oh, hang it, that's too bad."



"Not so very bad, either."



"Why?"



"Because he came down to Baltimore in the very train I was in, though I

didn't know it in time.  As we moved out of the station I saw him going

toward the iron gate with a satchel in his hand."



"Good; we'll catch him.  Let's lay a plan."



"Send description to the Baltimore police?"



"Why, what are you talking about?  No.  Do you want them to get the

reward?"



"What shall we do, then?"



The Colonel reflected.



"I'll tell you.  Put a personal in the Baltimore Sun.  Word it like this:



     "A. DROP ME A LINE, PETE."



"Hold on.  Which arm has he lost?"



"The right."



"Good.  Now then--



"A. DROP ME A LINE, PETE, EVEN IF YOU HAVE to write with your left hand.

Address X. Y. Z., General Postoffice, Washington.  From YOU KNOW WHO."



"There--that'll fetch him."



"But he won't know who--will he?"



"No, but he'll want to know, won't he?"



"Why, certainly--I didn't think of that.  What made you think of it?"



"Knowledge of human curiosity.  Strong trait, very strong trait."



"Now I'll go to my room and write it out and enclose a dollar and tell

them to print it to the worth of that."









CHAPTER IV.



The day wore itself out.  After dinner the two friends put in a long and

harassing evening trying to decide what to do with the five thousand

dollars reward which they were going to get when they should find One-

Armed Pete, and catch him, and prove him to be the right person, and

extradite him, and ship him to Tahlequah in the Indian Territory.  But

there were so many dazzling openings for ready cash that they found it

impossible to make up their minds and keep them made up.  Finally, Mrs.

Sellers grew very weary of it all, and said:



"What is the sense in cooking a rabbit before it's caught?"



Then the matter was dropped, for the time being, and all went to bed.

Next morning, being persuaded by Hawkins, the colonel made drawings and

specifications and went down and applied for a patent for his toy puzzle,

and Hawkins took the toy itself and started out to see what chance there

might be to do something with it commercially.  He did not have to go

far.  In a small old wooden shanty which had once been occupied as a

dwelling by some humble negro family he found a keen-eyed Yankee engaged

in repairing cheap chairs and other second-hand furniture.  This man

examined the toy indifferently; attempted to do the puzzle; found it not

so easy as he had expected; grew more interested, and finally

emphatically so; achieved a success at last, and asked:



"Is it patented?"



"Patent applied for."



"That will answer.  What do you want for it?"



"What will it retail for?"



"Well, twenty-five cents, I should think."



"What will you give for the exclusive right?"



"I couldn't give twenty dollars, if I had to pay cash down; but I'll tell

you what I'll do. I'll make it and market it, and pay you five cents

royalty on each one."



Washington sighed.  Another dream disappeared; no money in the thing.

So he said:



"All right, take it at that.  Draw me a paper."  He went his way with the

paper, and dropped the matter out of his mind dropped it out to make room

for further attempts to think out the most promising way to invest his

half of the reward, in case a partnership investment satisfactory to both

beneficiaries could not be hit upon.



He had not been very long at home when Sellers arrived sodden with grief

and booming with glad excitement--working both these emotions

successfully, sometimes separately, sometimes together.  He fell on

Hawkins's neck sobbing, and said:



"Oh, mourn with me my friend, mourn for my desolate house: death has

smitten my last kinsman and I am Earl of Rossmore--congratulate me!"



He turned to his wife, who had entered while this was going on, put his

arms about her and said--"You will bear up, for my sake, my lady--it had

to happen, it was decreed."



She bore up very well, and said:



"It's no great loss.  Simon Lathers was a poor well-meaning useless thing

and no account, and his brother never was worth shucks."



The rightful earl continued:



"I am too much prostrated by these conflicting griefs and joys to be able

to concentrate my mind upon affairs; I will ask our good friend here to

break the news by wire or post to the Lady Gwendolen and instruct her

to--"



"What Lady Gwendolen?"



"Our poor daughter, who, alas!--"



"Sally Sellers?  Mulberry Sellers, are you losing your mind?"



"There--please do not forget who you are, and who I am; remember your own

dignity, be considerate also of mine.  It were best to cease from using

my family name, now, Lady Rossmore."



"Goodness gracious, well, I never!  What am I to call you then?"



"In private, the ordinary terms of endearment will still be admissible,

to some degree; but in public it will be more becoming if your ladyship

will speak to me as my lord, or your lordship, and of me as Rossmore, or

the Earl, or his Lordship, and--"



"Oh, scat!  I can't ever do it, Berry."



"But indeed you must, my love--we must live up to our altered position

and submit with what grace we may to its requirements."



"Well, all right, have it your own way; I've never set my wishes against

your commands yet, Mul--my lord, and it's late to begin now, though to my

mind it's the rottenest foolishness that ever was."



"Spoken like my own true wife!  There, kiss and be friends again."



"But--Gwendolen!  I don't know how I am ever going to stand that name.

Why, a body wouldn't know Sally Sellers in it.  It's too large for her;

kind of like a cherub in an ulster, and it's a most outlandish sort of a

name, anyway, to my mind."



"You'll not hear her find fault with it, my lady."



"That's a true word.  She takes to any kind of romantic rubbish like she

was born to it.  She never got it from me, that's sure.  And sending her

to that silly college hasn't helped the matter any--just the other way."



"Now hear her, Hawkins!  Rowena-Ivanhoe College is the selectest and most

aristocratic seat of learning for young ladies in our country.  Under no

circumstances can a girl get in there unless she is either very rich and

fashionable or can prove four generations of what may be called American

nobility.  Castellated college-buildings--towers and turrets and an

imitation moat--and everything about the place named out of Sir Walter

Scott's books and redolent of royalty and state and style; and all the

richest girls keep phaetons, and coachmen in livery, and riding-horses,

with English grooms in plug hats and tight-buttoned coats, and top-boots,

and a whip-handle without any whip to it, to ride sixty-three feet behind

them--"



"And they don't learn a blessed thing, Washington Hawkins, not a single

blessed thing but showy rubbish and un-american pretentiousness.  But

send for the Lady Gwendolen--do; for I reckon the peerage regulations

require that she must come home and let on to go into seclusion and mourn

for those Arkansas blatherskites she's lost."



"My darling!  Blatherskites?  Remember--noblesse oblige."



"There, there--talk to me in your own tongue, Ross--you don't know any

other, and you only botch it when you try.  Oh, don't stare--it was a

slip, and no crime; customs of a life-time can't be dropped in a second.

Rossmore--there, now, be appeased, and go along with you and attend to

Gwendolen.  Are you going to write, Washington?--or telegraph?"



"He will telegraph, dear."



"I thought as much," my lady muttered, as she left the room.  "Wants it

so the address will have to appear on the envelop.  It will just make a

fool of that child.  She'll get it, of course, for if there are any other

Sellerses there they'll not be able to claim it.  And just leave her

alone to show it around and make the most of it.  Well, maybe she's

forgivable for that.  She's so poor and they're so rich, of course she's

had her share of snubs from the livery-flunkey sort, and I reckon it's

only human to want to get even."



Uncle Dan'l was sent with the telegram; for although a conspicuous object

in a corner of the drawing-room was a telephone hanging on a transmitter,

Washington found all attempts to raise the central office vain.  The

Colonel grumbled something about its being "always out of order when

you've got particular and especial use for it,"  but he didn't explain

that one of the reasons for this was that the thing was only a dummy and

hadn't any wire attached to it.  And yet the Colonel often used it--when

visitors were present--and seemed to get messages through it.  Mourning

paper and a seal were ordered, then the friends took a rest.



Next afternoon, while Hawkins, by request, draped Andrew Jackson's

portrait with crape, the rightful earl, wrote off the family bereavement

to the usurper in England--a letter which we have already read.  He also,

by letter to the village authorities at Duffy's Corners, Arkansas, gave

order that the remains of the late twins be embalmed by some St. Louis

expert and shipped at once to the usurper--with bill.  Then he drafted

out the Rossmore arms and motto on a great sheet of brown paper, and he

and Hawkins took it to Hawkins's Yankee furniture-mender and at the end

of an hour came back with a couple of stunning hatchments, which they

nailed up on the front of the house--attractions calculated to draw, and

they did; for it was mainly an idle and shiftless negro neighborhood,

with plenty of ragged children and indolent dogs to spare for a point of

interest like that, and keep on sparing them for it, days and days

together.



The new earl found--without surprise--this society item in the evening

paper, and cut it out and scrapbooked it:



     By a recent bereavement our esteemed fellow citizen, Colonel

     Mulberry Sellers, Perpetual Member-at-large of the Diplomatic Body,

     succeeds, as rightful lord, to the great earldom of Rossmore, third

     by order of precedence in the earldoms of Great Britain, and will

     take early measures, by suit in the House of Lords, to wrest the

     title and estates from the present usurping holder of them.  Until

     the season of mourning is past, the usual Thursday evening

     receptions at Rossmore Towers will be discontinued.



Lady Rossmore's comment-to herself:



"Receptions!  People who don't rightly know him may think he is

commonplace, but to my mind he is one of the most unusual men I ever saw.

As for suddenness and capacity in imagining things, his beat don't exist,

I reckon.  As like as not it wouldn't have occurred to anybody else to

name this poor old rat-trap Rossmore Towers, but it just comes natural to

him.  Well, no doubt it's a blessed thing to have an imagination that can

always make you satisfied, no matter how you are fixed.  Uncle Dave

Hopkins used to always say, 'Turn me into John Calvin, and I want to know

which place I'm going to; turn me into Mulberry Sellers and I don't

care.'"



The rightful earl's comment-to himself:



"It's a beautiful name, beautiful.  Pity I didn't think of it before I

wrote the usurper.  But I'll be ready for him when he answers."









CHAPTER V.



No answer to that telegram; no arriving daughter.  Yet nobody showed any

uneasiness or seemed surprised; that is, nobody but Washington.  After

three days of waiting, he asked Lady Rossmore what she supposed the

trouble was.  She answered, tranquilly:



"Oh, it's some notion of hers, you never can tell.  She's a Sellers, all

through--at least in some of her ways; and a Sellers can't tell you

beforehand what he's going to do, because he don't know himself till he's

done it.  She's all right; no occasion to worry about her.  When she's

ready she'll come or she'll write, and you can't tell which, till it's

happened."



It turned out to be a letter.  It was handed in at that moment, and was

received by the mother without trembling hands or feverish eagerness,

or any other of the manifestations common in the case of long delayed

answers to imperative telegrams.  She polished her glasses with

tranquility and thoroughness, pleasantly gossiping along, the while,

then opened the letter and began to read aloud:



                         KENILWORTH KEEP, REDGAUNTLET HALL,

                         ROWENA-IVANHOE COLLEGE, THURSDAY.



     DEAR PRECIOUS MAMMA ROSSMORE:



     Oh, the joy of it!--you can't think.  They had always turned up

     their noses at our pretentions, you know; and I had fought back as

     well as I could by turning up mine at theirs.  They always said it

     might be something great and fine to be rightful Shadow of an

     earldom, but to merely be shadow of a shadow, and two or three times

     removed at that--pooh-pooh!  And I always retorted that not to be

     able to show four generations of American-Colonial-Dutch Peddler-

     and-Salt-Cod-McAllister-Nobility might be endurable, but to have to

     confess such an origin--pfew-few!  Well, the telegram, it was just a

     cyclone!  The messenger came right into the great Rob Roy Hall of

     Audience, as excited as he could be, singing out, "Dispatch for Lady

     Gwendolen Sellers!" and you ought to have seen that simpering

     chattering assemblage of pinchbeck aristocrats, turn to stone!

     I was off in the corner, of course, by myself--it's where Cinderella

     belongs.  I took the telegram and read it, and tried to faint--and I

     could have done it if I had had any preparation, but it was all so

     sudden, you know--but no matter, I did the next best thing: I put my

     handkerchief to my eyes and fled sobbing to my room, dropping the

     telegram as I started.  I released one corner of my eye a moment--

     just enough to see the herd swarm for the telegram--and then

     continued my broken-hearted flight just as happy as a bird.



     Then the visits of condolence began, and I had to accept the loan of

     Miss Augusta-Templeton-Ashmore Hamilton's quarters because the press

     was so great and there isn't room for three and a cat in mine.  And

     I've been holding a Lodge of Sorrow ever since and defending myself

     against people's attempts to claim kin.  And do you know, the very

     first girl to fetch her tears and sympathy to my market was that

     foolish Skimperton girl who has always snubbed me so shamefully and

     claimed lordship and precedence of the whole college because some

     ancestor of hers, some time or other, was a McAllister.  Why it was

     like the bottom bird in the menagerie putting on airs because its

     head ancestor was a pterodactyl.



     But the ger-reatest triumph of all was--guess.  But you'll never.

     This is it.  That little fool and two others have always been

     fussing and fretting over which was entitled to precedence--by rank,

     you know.  They've nearly starved themselves at it; for each claimed

     the right to take precedence of all the college in leaving the

     table, and so neither of them ever finished her dinner, but broke

     off in the middle and tried to get out ahead of the others.  Well,

     after my first day's grief and seclusion--I was fixing up a mourning

     dress you see--I appeared at the public table again, and then--what

     do you think?  Those three fluffy goslings sat there contentedly,

     and squared up the long famine--lapped and lapped, munched and

     munched, ate and ate, till the gravy appeared in their eyes--humbly

     waiting for the Lady Gwendolen to take precedence and move out

     first, you see!



     Oh, yes, I've been having a darling good time.  And do you know, not

     one of these collegians has had the cruelty to ask me how I came by

     my new name.  With some, this is due to charity, but with the others

     it isn't.  They refrain, not from native kindness but from educated

     discretion.  I educated them.



     Well, as soon as I shall have settled up what's left of the old

     scores and snuffed up a few more of those pleasantly intoxicating

     clouds of incense, I shall pack and depart homeward.  Tell papa I

     am as fond of him as I am of my new name.  I couldn't put it

     stronger than that.  What an inspiration it was!  But inspirations

     come easy to him.



                    These, from your loving daughter,

                                        GWENDOLEN.





Hawkins reached for the letter and glanced over it.



"Good hand," he said, "and full of confidence and animation, and goes

racing right along.  She's bright--that's plain."



"Oh, they're all bright--the Sellerses.  Anyway, they would be, if there

were any.  Even those poor Latherses would have been bright if they had

been Sellerses; I mean full blood.  Of course they had a Sellers strain

in them--a big strain of it, too--but being a Bland dollar don't make it

a dollar just the same."



The seventh day after the date of the telegram Washington came dreaming

down to breakfast and was set wide awake by an electrical spasm of

pleasure.



Here was the most beautiful young creature he had ever seen in his life.

It was Sally Sellers Lady Gwendolen; she had come in the night.  And it

seemed to him that her clothes were the prettiest and the daintiest he

had ever looked upon, and the most exquisitely contrived and fashioned

and combined, as to decorative trimmings, and fixings, and melting

harmonies of color.  It was only a morning dress, and inexpensive, but he

confessed to himself, in the English common to Cherokee Strip, that it

was a "corker."  And now, as he perceived, the reason why the Sellers

household poverties and sterilities had been made to blossom like the

rose, and charm the eye and satisfy the spirit, stood explained; here was

the magician; here in the midst of her works, and furnishing in her own

person the proper accent and climaxing finish of the whole.



"My daughter, Major Hawkins--come home to mourn; flown home at the call

of affliction to help the authors of her being bear the burden of

bereavement.  She was very fond of the late earl--idolized him, sir,

idolized him--"



"Why, father, I've never seen him."



"True--she's right, I was thinking of another--er--of her mother--"



"I idolized that smoked haddock?--that sentimental, spiritless--"



"I was thinking of myself!  Poor noble fellow, we were inseparable com--"



"Hear the man!  Mulberry Sel--Mul--Rossmore--hang the troublesome name I

can never--if I've heard you say once, I've heard you say a thousand

times that if that poor sheep--"



"I was thinking of--of--I don't know who I was thinking of, and it

doesn't make any difference anyway; somebody idolized him, I recollect it

as if it were yesterday; and--"



"Father, I am going to shake hands with Major Hawkins, and let the

introduction work along and catch up at its leisure.  I remember you very

well in deed, Major Hawkins, although I was a little child when I saw you

last; and I am very, very glad indeed to see you again and have you in

our house as one of us;" and beaming in his face she finished her cordial

shake with the hope that he had not forgotten her.



He was prodigiously pleased by her outspoken heartiness, and wanted to

repay her by assuring her that he remembered her, and not only that but

better even than he remembered his own children, but the facts would not

quite warrant this; still, he stumbled through a tangled sentence which

answered just as well, since the purport of it was an awkward and

unintentional confession that her extraordinary beauty had so stupefied

him that he hadn't got back to his bearings, yet, and therefore couldn't

be certain as to whether he remembered her at all or not.  The speech

made him her friend; it couldn't well help it.



In truth the beauty of this fair creature was of a rare type, and may

well excuse a moment of our time spent in its consideration.  It did not

consist in the fact that she had eyes, nose, mouth, chin, hair, ears, it

consisted in their arrangement.  In true beauty, more depends upon right

location and judicious distribution of feature than upon multiplicity of

them.  So also as regards color.  The very combination of colors which in

a volcanic irruption would add beauty to a landscape might detach it from

a girl.  Such was Gwendolen Sellers.



The family circle being completed by Gwendolen's arrival, it was decreed

that the official mourning should now begin; that it should begin at six

o'clock every evening, (the dinner hour,) and end with the dinner.



"It's a grand old line, major, a sublime old line, and deserves to be

mourned for, almost royally; almost imperially, I may say.  Er--Lady

Gwendolen--but she's gone; never mind; I wanted my Peerage; I'll fetch it

myself, presently, and show you a thing or two that will give you a

realizing idea of what our house is.  I've been glancing through Burke,

and I find that of William the Conqueror's sixty-four natural ah--

my dear, would you mind getting me that book?  It's on the escritoire in

our boudoir.  Yes, as I was saying, there's only St. Albans, Buccleugh

and Grafton ahead of us on the list--all the rest of the British nobility

are in procession behind us.  Ah, thanks, my lady.  Now then, we turn to

William, and we find--letter for XYZ?  Oh, splendid--when'd you get it?"



"Last night; but I was asleep before you came, you were out so late; and

when I came to breakfast Miss Gwendolen--well, she knocked everything out

of me, you know--"



"Wonderful girl, wonderful; her great origin is detectable in her step,

her carriage, her features--but what does he say?  Come, this is

exciting."



"I haven't read it--er--Rossm--Mr. Rossm--er--"



"M'lord!  Just cut it short like that.  It's the English way.  I'll open

it.  Ah, now let's see."



A.  TO YOU KNOW WHO.  Think I know you.  Wait ten days.  Coming to

     Washington.



The excitement died out of both men's faces.  There was a brooding

silence for a while, then the younger one said with a sigh:



"Why, we can't wait ten days for the money."



"No--the man's unreasonable; we are down to the bed rock, financially

speaking."



"If we could explain to him in some way, that we are so situated that

time is of the utmost importance to us--"



"Yes--yes, that's it--and so if it would be as convenient for him to come

at once it would be a great accommodation to us, and one which we--which

we--which we--wh--well, which we should sincerely appreciate--"



"That's it--and most gladly reciprocate--"



"Certainly--that'll fetch him.  Worded right, if he's a man--got any of

the feelings of a man, sympathies and all that, he'll be here inside of

twenty-four hours.  Pen and paper--come, we'll get right at it."



Between them they framed twenty-two different advertisements, but none

was satisfactory.  A main fault in all of them was urgency.  That feature

was very troublesome: if made prominent, it was calculated to excite

Pete's suspicion; if modified below the suspicion-point it was flat and

meaningless.  Finally the Colonel resigned, and said:



"I have noticed, in such literary experiences as I have had, that one of

the most taking things to do is to conceal your meaning when you are

trying to conceal it.  Whereas, if you go at literature with a free

conscience and nothing to conceal, you can turn out a book, every time,

that the very elect can't understand.  They all do."



Then Hawkins resigned also, and the two agreed that they must manage to

wait the ten days some how or other.  Next, they caught a ray of cheer:

since they had something definite to go upon, now, they could probably

borrow money on the reward--enough, at any rate, to tide them over till

they got it; and meantime the materializing recipe would be perfected,

and then good bye to trouble for good and all.



The next day, May the tenth, a couple of things happened--among others.

The remains of the noble Arkansas twins left our shores for England,

consigned to Lord Rossmore, and Lord Rossmore's son, Kirkcudbright

Llanover Marjoribanks Sellers Viscount Berkeley, sailed from Liverpool

for America to place the reversion of the earldom in the hands of the

rightful peer, Mulberry Sellers, of Rossmore Towers in the District of

Columbia, U. S. A.



These two impressive shipments would meet and part in mid-Atlantic, five

days later, and give no sign.









CHAPTER VI.



In the course of time the twins arrived and were delivered to their great

kinsman.  To try to describe the rage of that old man would profit

nothing, the attempt would fall so far short of the purpose.  However

when he had worn himself out and got quiet again, he looked the matter

over and decided that the twins had some moral rights, although they had

no legal ones; they were of his blood, and it could not be decorous to

treat them as common clay.  So he laid them with their majestic kin in

the Cholmondeley church, with imposing state and ceremony, and added the

supreme touch by officiating as chief mourner himself.  But he drew the

line at hatchments.



Our friends in Washington watched the weary days go by, while they waited

for Pete and covered his name with reproaches because of his calamitous

procrastinations.  Meantime, Sally Sellers, who was as practical and

democratic as the Lady Gwendolen Sellers was romantic and aristocratic,

was leading a life of intense interest and activity and getting the most

she could out of her double personality.  All day long in the privacy of

her work-room, Sally Sellers earned bread for the Sellers family; and all

the evening Lady Gwendolen Sellers supported the Rossmore dignity.  All

day she was American, practically, and proud of the work of her head and

hands and its commercial result; all the evening she took holiday and

dwelt in a rich shadow-land peopled with titled and coroneted fictions.

By day, to her, the place was a plain, unaffected, ramshackle old trap

just that, and nothing more; by night it was Rossmore Towers.  At college

she had learned a trade without knowing it.  The girls had found out that

she was the designer of her own gowns.  She had no idle moments after

that, and wanted none; for the exercise of an extraordinary gift is the

supremest pleasure in life, and it was manifest that Sally Sellers

possessed a gift of that sort in the matter of costume-designing.  Within

three days after reaching home she had hunted up some work; before Pete

was yet due in Washington, and before the twins were fairly asleep in

English soil, she was already nearly swamped with work, and the

sacrificing of the family chromos for debt had got an effective check.



"She's a brick," said Rossmore to the Major; "just her father all over:

prompt to labor with head or hands, and not ashamed of it; capable,

always capable, let the enterprise be what it may; successful by nature--

don't know what defeat is; thus, intensely and practically American by

inhaled nationalism, and at the same time intensely and aristocratically

European by inherited nobility of blood.  Just me, exactly: Mulberry

Sellers in matter of finance and invention; after office hours, what do

you find?  The same clothes, yes, but what's in them?  Rossmore of the

peerage."



The two friends had haunted the general post-office daily.  At last they

had their reward.  Toward evening the 20th of May, they got a letter for

XYZ.  It bore the Washington postmark; the note itself was not dated.  It

said:



     "Ash barrel back of lamp post Black horse Alley.  If you are playing

     square go and set on it to-morrow morning 21st 10.22 not sooner not

     later wait till I come."



The friends cogitated over the note profoundly.  Presently the earl said:



"Don't you reckon he's afraid we are a sheriff with a requisition?"



"Why, m'lord?"



"Because that's no place for a seance.  Nothing friendly, nothing

sociable about it.  And at the same time, a body that wanted to know who

was roosting on that ash-barrel without exposing himself by going near

it, or seeming to be interested in it, could just stand on the street

corner and take a glance down the alley and satisfy himself, don't you

see?"



"Yes, his idea is plain, now.  He seems to be a man that can't be candid

and straightforward.  He acts as if he thought we--shucks, I wish he had

come out like a man and told us what hotel he--"



"Now you've struck it! you've struck it sure, Washington; he has told

us."



"Has he?"



"Yes, he has; but he didn't mean to.  That alley is a lonesome little

pocket that runs along one side of the New Gadsby.  That's his hotel."



"What makes' you think that?"



"Why, I just know it.  He's got a room that's just across from that lamp

post.  He's going to sit there perfectly comfortable behind his shutters

at 10.22 to-morrow, and when he sees us sitting on the ash-barrel, he'll

say to himself, 'I saw one of those fellows on the train'--and then he'll

pack his satchel in half a minute and ship for the ends of the earth."



Hawkins turned sick with disappointment:



"Oh, dear, it's all up, Colonel--it's exactly what he'll do."



"Indeed he won't!"



"Won't he?  Why?"



"Because you won't be holding the ash barrel down, it'll be me.  You'll

be coming in with an officer and a requisition in plain clothes--the

officer, I mean--the minute you see him arrive and open up a talk with

me."



"Well, what a head you have got, Colonel Sellers!  I never should have

thought of that in the world."



"Neither would any earl of Rossmore, betwixt William's contribution and

Mulberry--as earl; but it's office hours, now, you see, and the earl in

me sleeps.  Come--I'll show you his very room."



They reached the neighborhood of the New Gadsby about nine in the

evening, and passed down the alley to the lamp post.



"There you are," said the colonel, triumphantly, with a wave of his hand

which took in the whole side of the hotel.  "There it is--what did I tell

you?"



"Well, but--why, Colonel, it's six stories high.  I don't quite make out

which window you--"



"All the windows, all of them.  Let him have his choice--I'm indifferent,

now that I have located him.  You go and stand on the corner and wait;

I'll prospect the hotel."



The earl drifted here and there through the swarming lobby, and finally

took a waiting position in the neighborhood of the elevator.  During an

hour crowds went up and crowds came down; and all complete as to limbs;

but at last the watcher got a glimpse of a figure that was satisfactory--

got a glimpse of the back of it, though he had missed his chance at the

face through waning alertness.  The glimpse revealed a cowboy hat, and

below it a plaided sack of rather loud pattern, and an empty sleeve

pinned up to the shoulder.  Then the elevator snatched the vision aloft

and the watcher fled away in joyful excitement, and rejoined the

fellow-conspirator.



"We've got him, Major--got him sure!  I've seen him--seen him good; and I

don't care where or when that man approaches me backwards, I'll recognize

him every time.  We're all right.  Now for the requisition."



They got it, after the delays usual in such cases.  By half past eleven

they were at home and happy, and went to bed full of dreams of the

morrow's great promise.



Among the elevator load which had the suspect for fellow-passenger was a

young kinsman of Mulberry Sellers, but Mulberry was not aware of it and

didn't see him.  It was Viscount Berkeley.









CHAPTER VII.



Arrived in his room Lord Berkeley made preparations for that first and

last and all-the-time duty of the visiting Englishman--the jotting down

in his diary of his "impressions" to date.  His preparations consisted in

ransacking his "box" for a pen.  There was a plenty of steel pens on his

table with the ink bottle, but he was English.  The English people

manufacture steel pens for nineteen-twentieths of the globe, but they

never use any themselves.  They use exclusively the pre-historic quill.

My lord not only found a quill pen, but the best one he had seen in

several years--and after writing diligently for some time, closed with

the following entry:



          BUT IN ONE THING I HAVE MADE AN IMMENSE MISTAKE, I OUGHT TO

          HAVE SHUCKED MY TITLE AND CHANGED MY NAME BEFORE I STARTED.



He sat admiring that pen a while, and then went on:



"All attempts to mingle with the common people and became permanently one

of them are going to fail, unless I can get rid of it, disappear from it,

and re-appear with the solid protection of a new name.  I am astonished

and pained to see how eager the most of these Americans are to get

acquainted with a lord, and how diligent they are in pushing attentions

upon him.  They lack English servility, it is true--but they could

acquire it, with practice.  My quality travels ahead of me in the most

mysterious way.  I write my family name without additions, on the

register of this hotel, and imagine that I am going to pass for an

obscure and unknown wanderer, but the clerk promptly calls out, 'Front!

show his lordship to four-eighty-two!' and before I can get to the lift

there is a reporter trying to interview me as they call it.  This sort of

thing shall cease at once.  I will hunt up the American Claimant the

first thing in the morning, accomplish my mission, then change my lodging

and vanish from scrutiny under a fictitious name."





He left his diary on the table, where it would be handy in case any new

"impressions" should wake him up in the night, then he went to bed and

presently fell asleep.  An hour or two passed, and then he came slowly to

consciousness with a confusion of mysterious and augmenting sounds

hammering at the gates of his brain for admission; the next moment he was

sharply awake, and those sounds burst with the rush and roar and boom of

an undammed freshet into his ears.  Banging and slamming of shutters;

smashing of windows and the ringing clash of falling glass; clatter of

flying feet along the halls; shrieks, supplications, dumb moanings of

despair, within, hoarse shouts of command outside; cracklings and

mappings, and the windy roar of victorious flames!



Bang, bang, bang!  on the door, and a cry:



"Turn out--the house is on fire!"



The cry passed on, and the banging.  Lord Berkeley sprang out of bed and

moved with all possible speed toward the clothes-press in the darkness

and the gathering smoke, but fell over a chair and lost his bearings.

He groped desperately about on his hands, and presently struck his head

against the table and was deeply grateful, for it gave him his bearings

again, since it stood close by the door.  He seized his most precious

possession; his journaled Impressions of America, and darted from the

room.



He ran down the deserted hall toward the red lamp which he knew indicated

the place of a fire-escape.  The door of the room beside it was open.

In the room the gas was burning full head; on a chair was a pile of

clothing.  He ran to the window, could not get it up, but smashed it with

a chair, and stepped out on the landing of the fire-escape; below him was

a crowd of men, with a sprinkling of women and youth, massed in a ruddy

light.  Must he go down in his spectral night dress?  No--this side of

the house was not yet on fire except at the further end; he would snatch

on those clothes.  Which he did.  They fitted well enough, though a

trifle loosely, and they were just a shade loud as to pattern.  Also as

to hat--which was of a new breed to him, Buffalo Bill not having been to

England yet.  One side of the coat went on, but the other side refused;

one of its sleeves was turned up and stitched to the shoulder.  He

started down without waiting to get it loose, made the trip successfully,

and was promptly hustled outside the limit-rope by the police.



The cowboy hat and the coat but half on made him too much of a centre of

attraction for comfort, although nothing could be more profoundly

respectful, not to say deferential, than was the manner of the crowd

toward him.  In his mind he framed a discouraged remark for early entry

in his diary: "It is of no use; they know a lord through any disguise,

and show awe of him--even something very like fear, indeed."



Presently one of the gaping and adoring half-circle of boys ventured a

timid question.  My lord answered it.  The boys glanced wonderingly at

each other and from somewhere fell the comment:



"English cowboy!  Well, if that ain't curious."



Another mental note to be preserved for the diary: "Cowboy.  Now what

might a cowboy be?  Perhaps--" But the viscount perceived that some more

questions were about to be asked; so he worked his way out of the crowd,

released the sleeve, put on the coat and wandered away to seek a humble

and obscure lodging.  He found it and went to bed and was soon asleep.



In the morning, he examined his clothes.  They were rather assertive, it

seemed to him, but they were new and clean, at any rate.  There was

considerable property in the pockets.  Item, five one-hundred dollar

bills.  Item, near fifty dollars in small bills and silver.  Plug of

tobacco.  Hymn-book, which refuses to open; found to contain whiskey.

Memorandum book bearing no name.  Scattering entries in it, recording in

a sprawling, ignorant hand, appointments, bets, horse-trades, and so on,

with people of strange, hyphenated name--Six-Fingered Jake, Young-Man-

afraid-of his-Shadow, and the like.  No letters, no documents.



The young man muses--maps out his course.  His letter of credit is burned;

he will borrow the small bills and the silver in these pockets, apply

part of it to advertising for the owner, and use the rest for sustenance

while he seeks work.  He sends out for the morning paper, next, and

proceeds to read about the fire.  The biggest line in the display-head

announces his own death!  The body of the account furnishes all the

particulars; and tells how, with the inherited heroism of his caste, he

went on saving women and children until escape for himself was

impossible; then with the eyes of weeping multitudes upon him, he stood

with folded arms and sternly awaited the approach of the devouring fiend;

"and so standing, amid a tossing sea of flame and on-rushing billows of

smoke, the noble young heir of the great house of Rossmore was caught up

in a whirlwind of fiery glory, and disappeared forever from the vision of

men."



The thing was so fine and generous and knightly that it brought the

moisture to his eyes.  Presently he said to himself: "What to do is as

plain as day, now.  My Lord Berkeley is dead--let him stay so.  Died

creditably, too; that will make the calamity the easier for my father.

And I don't have to report to the American Claimant, now.  Yes, nothing

could be better than the way matters have turned out.  I have only to

furnish myself with a new name, and take my new start in life totally

untrammeled.  Now I breathe my first breath of real freedom; and how

fresh and breezy and inspiring it is!  At last I am a man! a man on equal

terms with my neighbor; and by my manhood; and by it alone, I shall rise

and be seen of the world, or I shall sink from sight and deserve it.

This is the gladdest day, and the proudest, that ever poured it's sun

upon my head!"









CHAPTER VIII.



"GOD bless my soul, Hawkins!"



The morning paper dropped from the Colonel's nerveless-grasp.



"What is it?"



"He's gone!--the bright, the young, the gifted, the noblest of his

illustrious race--gone! gone up in flames and unimaginable glory!"



"Who?"



"My precious, precious young kinsman--Kirkcudbright Llanover Marjoribanks

Sellers Viscount Berkeley, son and heir of usurping Rossmore."



"No!"



"It's true--too true."



"When?"



"Last night."



"Where?"



"Right here in Washington; where he arrived from England last night, the

papers say."



"You don't say!"



"Hotel burned down."



"What hotel?"



"The New Gadsby!"



"Oh, my goodness!  And have we lost both of them?"



"Both who?"



"One-Arm Pete."



"Oh, great guns, I forgot all about him.  Oh, I hope not."



"Hope!  Well, I should say!  Oh, we can't spare him!  We can better

afford to lose a million viscounts than our only support and stay."



They searched the paper diligently, and were appalled to find that a

one-armed man had been seen flying along one of the halls of the hotel

in his underclothing and apparently out of his head with fright, and as

he would listen to no one and persisted in making for a stairway which

would carry him to certain death, his case was given over as a hopeless

one.



"Poor fellow," sighed Hawkins; "and he had friends so near.  I wish we

hadn't come away from there--maybe we could have saved him."



The earl looked up and said calmly:



"His being dead doesn't matter.  He was uncertain before.  We've got him

sure, this time."



"Got him?  How?"



"I will materialize him."



"Rossmore, don't--don't trifle with me.  Do you mean that?  Can you do

it?"



"I can do it, just as sure as you are sitting there.  And I will."



"Give me your hand, and let me have the comfort of shaking it.  I was

perishing, and you have put new life into me.  Get at it, oh, get at it

right away."



"It will take a little time, Hawkins, but there's no hurry, none in the

world--in the circumstances.  And of course certain duties have devolved

upon me now, which necessarily claim my first attention.  This poor young

nobleman--"



"Why, yes, I am sorry for my heartlessness, and you smitten with this new

family affliction.  Of course you must materialize him first--I quite

understand that."



"I--I--well, I wasn't meaning just that, but,--why, what am I thinking

of!  Of course I must materialize him.  Oh, Hawkins, selfishness is the

bottom trait in human nature; I was only thinking that now, with the

usurper's heir out of the way.  But you'll forgive that momentary weakness,

and forget it.  Don't ever remember it against me that Mulberry Sellers

was once mean enough to think the thought that I was thinking.  I'll

materialise him--I will, on my honor--and I'd do it were he a thousand

heirs jammed into one and stretching in a solid rank from here to the

stolen estates of Rossmore, and barring the road forever to the rightful

earl!



"There spoke the real Sellers--the other had a false ring, old friend."



"Hawkins, my boy, it just occurs to me--a thing I keep forgetting to

mention--a matter that we've got to be mighty careful about."



"What is that?"



"We must keep absolutely still about these materializations.  Mind, not a

hint of them must escape--not a hint.  To say nothing of how my wife and

daughter--high-strung, sensitive organizations--might feel about them,

the negroes wouldn't stay on the place a minute."



"That's true, they wouldn't.  It's well you spoke, for I'm not naturally

discreet with my tongue when I'm not warned."



Sellers reached out and touched a bell-button in the wall; set his eye

upon the rear door and waited; touched it again and waited; and just as

Hawkins was remarking admiringly that the Colonel was the most

progressive and most alert man he had ever seen, in the matter of

impressing into his service every modern convenience the moment it was

invented, and always keeping breast to breast with the drum major in the

great work of material civilization, he forsook the button (which hadn't

any wire attached to it,) rang a vast dinner bell which stood on the

table, and remarked that he had tried that new-fangled dry battery, now,

to his entire satisfaction, and had got enough of it; and added:



"Nothing would do Graham Bell but I must try it; said the mere fact of my

trying it would secure public confidence, and get it a chance to show

what it could do.  I told him that in theory a dry battery was just a

curled darling and no mistake, but when it come to practice, sho!--and

here's the result.  Was I right?  What should you say, Washington

Hawkins?  You've seen me try that button twice.  Was I right?--that's the

idea.  Did I know what I was talking about, or didn't I?"



"Well, you know how I feel about you, Colonel Sellers, and always have

felt.  It seems to me that you always know everything about everything.

If that man had known you as I know you he would have taken your judgment

at the start, and dropped his dry battery where it was."



"Did you ring, Marse Sellers?"



"No, Marse Sellers didn't."



"Den it was you, Marse Washington.  I's heah, suh."



"No, it wasn't Marse Washington, either."



"De good lan'! who did ring her, den?"



"Lord Rossmore rang it!"



The old negro flung up his hands and exclaimed:



"Blame my skin if I hain't gone en forgit dat name agin!  Come heah,

Jinny--run heah, honey."



Jinny arrived.



"You take dish-yer order de lord gwine to give you I's gwine down suller

and study dat name tell I git it."



"I take de order!  Who's yo' nigger las' year?  De bell rung for you."



"Dat don't make no diffunce.  When a bell ring for anybody, en old

marster tell me to--"



"Clear out, and settle it in the kitchen!"



The noise of the quarreling presently sank to a murmur in the distance,

and the earl added: "That's a trouble with old house servants that were

your slaves once and have been your personal friends always."



"Yes, and members of the family."



"Members of the family is just what they become--THE members of the

family, in fact.  And sometimes master and mistress of the household.

These two are mighty good and loving and faithful and honest, but hang

it, they do just about as they please, they chip into a conversation

whenever they want to, and the plain fact is, they ought to be killed."



It was a random remark, but it gave him an idea--however, nothing could

happen without that result.



"What I wanted, Hawkins, was to send for the family and break the news to

them."



"O, never mind bothering with the servants, then.  I will go and bring

them down."



While he was gone, the earl worked his idea.



"Yes," he said to himself, "when I've got the materializing down to a

certainty, I will get Hawkins to kill them, and after that they will be

under better control.  Without doubt a materialized negro could easily be

hypnotized into a state resembling silence.  And this could be made

permanent--yes, and also modifiable, at will--sometimes very silent,

sometimes turn on more talk, more action, more emotion, according to what

you want.  It's a prime good idea.  Make it adjustable--with a screw or

something."



The two ladies entered, now, with Hawkins, and the two negroes followed,

uninvited, and fell to brushing and dusting around, for they perceived

that there was matter of interest to the fore, and were willing to find

out what it was.



Sellers broke the news with stateliness and ceremony, first warning the

ladies, with gentle art, that a pang of peculiar sharpness was about to

be inflicted upon their hearts--hearts still sore from a like hurt, still

lamenting a like loss--then he took the paper, and with trembling lips

and with tears in his voice he gave them that heroic death-picture.



The result was a very genuine outbreak of sorrow and sympathy from all

the hearers.  The elder lady cried, thinking how proud that great-hearted

young hero's mother would be, if she were living, and how unappeasable

her grief; and the two old servants cried with her, and spoke out their

applauses and their pitying lamentations with the eloquent sincerity and

simplicity native to their race.  Gwendolen was touched, and the romantic

side of her nature was strongly wrought upon.  She said that such a

nature as that young man's was rarely and truly noble, and nearly

perfect; and that with nobility of birth added it was entirely perfect.

For such a man she could endure all things, suffer all things, even to

the sacrificing of her life.  She wished she could have seen him; the

slightest, the most momentary, contact with such a spirit would have

ennobled her own character and made ignoble thoughts and ignoble acts

thereafter impossible to her forever.



"Have they found the body, Rossmore?" asked the wife.



"Yes, that is, they've found several.  It must be one of them, but none

of them are recognizable."



"What are you going to do?"



"I am going down there and identify one of them and send it home to the

stricken father."



"But papa, did you ever see the young man?"



"No, Gwendolen-why?"



"How will you identify it?"



"I--well, you know it says none of them are recognizable.  I'll send his

father one of them--there's probably no choice."



Gwendolen knew it was not worth while to argue the matter further, since

her father's mind was made up and there was a chance for him to appear

upon that sad scene down yonder in an authentic and official way.  So she

said no more--till he asked for a basket.



"A basket, papa?  What for?"



"It might be ashes."









CHAPTER IX.



The earl and Washington started on the sorrowful errand, talking as they

walked.



"And as usual!"



"What, Colonel?"



"Seven of them in that hotel.  Actresses.  And all burnt out, of

course."



"Any of them burnt up?"



"Oh, no they escaped; they always do; but there's never a one of them

that knows enough to fetch out her jewelry with her."



"That's strange."



"Strange--it's the most unaccountable thing in the world.  Experience

teaches them nothing; they can't seem to learn anything except out of a

book.  In some uses there's manifestly a fatality about it.  For

instance, take What's-her-name, that plays those sensational thunder and

lightning parts.  She's got a perfectly immense reputation--draws like a

dog-fight--and it all came from getting burnt out in hotels."



"Why, how could that give her a reputation as an actress?"



"It didn't--it only made her name familiar.  People want to see her play

because her name is familiar, but they don't know what made it familiar,

because they don't remember.  First, she was at the bottom of the

ladder, and absolutely obscure wages thirteen dollars a week and find her

own pads."



"Pads?"



"Yes--things to fat up her spindles with so as to be plump and attractive.

Well, she got burnt out in a hotel and lost $30,000 worth of diamonds."



"She?  Where'd she get them?"



"Goodness knows--given to her, no doubt, by spoony young flats and sappy

old bald-heads in the front row.  All the papers were full of it.  She

struck for higher pay and got it.  Well, she got burnt out again and lost

all her diamonds, and it gave her such a lift that she went starring."



"Well, if hotel fires are all she's got to depend on to keep up her name,

it's a pretty precarious kind of a reputation I should think."



"Not with her.  No, anything but that.  Because she's so lucky; born

lucky, I reckon.  Every time there's a hotel fire she's in it.  She's

always there--and if she can't be there herself, her diamonds are.  Now

you can't make anything out of that but just sheer luck."



"I never heard of such a thing.  She must have lost quarts of diamonds."



"Quarts, she's lost bushels of them.  It's got so that the hotels are

superstitious about her.  They won't let her in.  They think there will

be a fire; and besides, if she's there it cancels the insurance.  She's

been waning a little lately, but this fire will set her up.  She lost

$60,000 worth last night."



"I think she's a fool.  If I had $60,000 worth of diamonds I wouldn't

trust them in a hotel."



"I wouldn't either; but you can't teach an actress that.  This one's been

burnt out thirty-five times.  And yet if there's a hotel fire in San

Francisco to-night she's got to bleed again, you mark my words.  Perfect

ass; they say she's got diamonds in every hotel in the country."



When they arrived at the scene of the fire the poor old earl took one

glimpse at the melancholy morgue and turned away his face overcome by the

spectacle.  He said:



"It is too true, Hawkins--recognition is impossible, not one of the five

could be identified by its nearest friend.  You make the selection, I

can't bear it."



"Which one had I better--"



"Oh, take any of them.  Pick out the best one."



However, the officers assured the earl--for they knew him, everybody in

Washington knew him--that the position in which these bodies were found

made it impossible that any one of them could be that of his noble young

kinsman.  They pointed out the spot where, if the newspaper account was

correct, he must have sunk down to destruction; and at a wide distance

from this spot they showed him where the young man must have gone down in

case he was suffocated in his room; and they showed him still a third

place, quite remote, where he might possibly have found his death if

perchance he tried to escape by the side exit toward the rear.  The old

Colonel brushed away a tear and said to Hawkins:



"As it turns out there was something prophetic in my fears.  Yes, it's a

matter of ashes.  Will you kindly step to a grocery and fetch a couple

more baskets?"



Reverently they got a basket of ashes from each of those now hallowed

spots, and carried them home to consult as to the best manner of

forwarding them to England, and also to give them an opportunity to "lie

in state,"--a mark of respect which the colonel deemed obligatory,

considering the high rank of the deceased.



They set the baskets on the table in what was formerly the library,

drawing-room and workshop--now the Hall of Audience--and went up stairs

to the lumber room to see if they could find a British flag to use as a

part of the outfit proper to the lying in state.  A moment later, Lady

Rossmore came in from the street and caught sight of the baskets just as

old Jinny crossed her field of vision.  She quite lost her patience and

said:



"Well, what will you do next?  What in the world possessed you to clutter

up the parlor table with these baskets of ashes?"



"Ashes?"  And she came to look.  She put up her hands in pathetic

astonishment.  "Well, I never see de like!"



"Didn't you do it?"



"Who, me?  Clah to goodness it's de fust time I've sot eyes on 'em, Miss

Polly.  Dat's Dan'l.  Dat ole moke is losin' his mine."



But it wasn't Dan'l, for he was called, and denied it.



"Dey ain't no way to 'splain dat.  Wen hit's one er dese-yer common

'currences, a body kin reckon maybe de cat--"



"Oh!" and a shudder shook Lady Rossmore to her foundations.  "I see it

all.  Keep away from them--they're his."



"His, m' lady?"



"Yes--your young Marse Sellers from England that's burnt up."



She was alone with the ashes--alone before she could take half a breath.

Then she went after Mulberry Sellers, purposing to make short work with

his program, whatever it might be; "for," said she, "when his

sentimentals are up, he's a numskull, and there's no knowing what

extravagance he'll contrive, if you let him alone."  She found him.

He had found the flag and was bringing it.  When she heard that his idea

was to have the remains "lie in state, and invite the government and the

public," she broke it up.  She said:



"Your intentions are all right--they always are--you want to do honour to

the remains, and surely nobody can find any fault with that, for he was

your kin; but you are going the wrong way about it, and you will see it

yourself if you stop and think.  You can't file around a basket of ashes

trying to look sorry for it and make a sight that is really solemn,

because the solemner it is, the more it isn't--anybody can see that.  It

would be so with one basket; it would be three times so with three.

Well, it stands to reason that if it wouldn't be solemn with one mourner,

it wouldn't be with a procession--and there would be five thousand people

here.  I don't know but it would be pretty near ridiculous; I think it

would.  No, Mulberry, they can't lie in state--it would be a mistake.

Give that up and think of something else."



So he gave it up; and not reluctantly, when he had thought it over and

realized how right her instinct was.  He concluded to merely sit up with

the remains just himself and Hawkins.  Even this seemed a doubtful

attention, to his wife, but she offered no objection, for it was plain

that he had a quite honest and simple-hearted desire to do the friendly

and honourable thing by these forlorn poor relics which could command no

hospitality in this far off land of strangers but his.  He draped the

flag about the baskets, put some crape on the door-knob, and said with

satisfaction:



"There--he is as comfortable, now, as we can make him in the

circumstances.  Except--yes, we must strain a point there--one must do as

one would wish to be done by--he must have it."



"Have what, dear?"



"Hatchment."



The wife felt that the house-front was standing about all it could well

stand, in that way; the prospect of another stunning decoration of that

nature distressed her, and she wished the thing had not occurred to him.

She said, hesitatingly:



"But I thought such an honour as that wasn't allowed to any but very very

near relations, who--"



"Right, you are quite right, my lady, perfectly right; but there aren't

any nearer relatives than relatives by usurpation.  We cannot avoid it;

we are slaves of aristocratic custom and must submit."



The hatchments were unnecessarily generous, each being as large as a

blanket, and they were unnecessarily volcanic, too, as to variety and

violence of color, but they pleased the earl's barbaric eye, and they

satisfied his taste for symmetry and completeness, too, for they left no

waste room to speak of on the house-front.



Lady Rossmore and her daughter assisted at the sitting-up till near

midnight, and helped the gentlemen to consider what ought to be done next

with the remains.  Rossmore thought they ought to be sent home with a

committee and resolutions,--at once.  But the wife was doubtful.  She

said:



"Would you send all of the baskets?"



"Oh, yes, all."



"All at once?"



"To his father?  Oh, no--by no means.  Think of the shock.  No--one at a

time; break it to him by degrees."



"Would that have that effect, father?"



"Yes, my daughter.  Remember, you are young and elastic, but he is old.

To send him the whole at once might well be more than he could bear.

But mitigated--one basket at a time, with restful intervals between,

he would be used to it by the time he got all of him.  And sending him

in three ships is safer anyway.  On account of wrecks and storms."



"I don't like the idea, father.  If I were his father it would be

dreadful to have him coming in that--in that--"



"On the installment plan," suggested Hawkins, gravely, and proud of being

able to help.



"Yes--dreadful to have him coming in that incoherent way.  There would be

the strain of suspense upon me all the time.  To have so depressing a

thing as a funeral impending, delayed, waiting, unaccomplished--"



"Oh, no, my child," said the earl reassuringly, "there would be nothing

of that kind; so old a gentleman could not endure a long-drawn suspense

like that.  There will be three funerals."



Lady Rossmore looked up surprised, and said:



"How is that going to make it easier for him?  It's a total mistake, to

my mind.  He ought to be buried all at once; I'm sure of it."



"I should think so, too," said Hawkins.



"And certainly I should," said the daughter.



"You are all wrong," said the earl.  "You will see it yourselves, if you

think.  Only one of these baskets has got him in it."



"Very well, then," said Lady Rossmore, "the thing is perfectly simple--

bury that one."



"Certainly," said Lady Gwendolen.



"But it is not simple," said the earl, "because we do not know which

basket he is in.  We know he is in one of them, but that is all we do

know.  You see now, I reckon, that I was right; it takes three funerals,

there is no other way."



"And three graves and three monuments and three inscriptions?" asked the

daughter.



"Well--yes--to do it right.  That is what I should do."



"It could not be done so, father.  Each of the inscriptions would give

the same name and the same facts and say he was under each and all of

these monuments, and that would not answer at all."



The earl nestled uncomfortably in his chair.



"No," he said, "that is an objection.  That is a serious objection.  I

see no way out."



There was a general silence for a while.  Then Hawkins said:



"It seems to me that if we mixed the three ramifications together--"



The earl grasped him by the hand and shook it gratefully.



"It solves the whole problem," he said.  "One ship, one funeral, one

grave, one monument--it is admirably conceived.  It does you honor, Major

Hawkins, it has relieved me of a most painful embarrassment and distress,

and it will save that poor stricken old father much suffering.  Yes, he

shall go over in one basket."



"When?" asked the wife.



"To-morrow-immediately, of course."



"I would wait, Mulberry."



"Wait?  Why?"



"You don't want to break that childless old man's heart."



"God knows I don't!"



"Then wait till he sends for his son's remains.  If you do that, you will

never have to give him the last and sharpest pain a parent can know--

I mean, the certainty that his son is dead.  For he will never send."



"Why won't he?"



"Because to send--and find out the truth--would rob him of the one

precious thing left him, the uncertainty, the dim hope that maybe, after

all, his boy escaped, and he will see him again some day."



"Why Polly, he'll know by the papers that he was burnt up."



"He won't let himself believe the papers; he'll argue against anything

and everything that proves his son is dead; and he will keep that up and

live on it, and on nothing else till he dies.  But if the remains should

actually come, and be put before that poor old dim-hoping soul--"



"Oh, my God, they never shall!  Polly, you've saved me from a crime, and

I'll bless you for it always.  Now we know what to do.  We'll place them

reverently away, and he shall never know."









CHAPTER X.



The young Lord Berkeley, with the fresh air of freedom in his nostrils,

was feeling invincibly strong for his new career; and yet--and yet--if

the fight should prove a very hard one at first, very discouraging, very

taxing on untoughened moral sinews, he might in some weak moment want to

retreat.  Not likely, of course, but possibly that might happen.  And so

on the whole it might be pardonable caution to burn his bridges behind

him.  Oh, without doubt.  He must not stop with advertising for the owner

of that money, but must put it where he could not borrow from it himself,

meantime, under stress of circumstances.  So he went down town, and put

in his advertisement, then went to a bank and handed in the $500 for

deposit.



"What name?"



He hesitated and colored a little; he had forgotten to make a selection.

He now brought out the first one that suggested itself:



"Howard Tracy."



When he was gone the clerks, marveling, said:



"The cowboy blushed."



The first step was accomplished.  The money was still under his command

and at his disposal, but the next step would dispose of that difficulty.

He went to another bank and drew upon the first bank for the 500 by

check.  The money was collected and deposited a second time to the credit

of Howard Tracy.  He was asked to leave a few samples of his signature,

which he did.  Then he went away, once more proud and of perfect courage,

saying:



"No help for me now, for henceforth I couldn't draw that money without

identification, and that is become legally impossible.  No resources to

fall back on.  It is work or starve from now to the end.  I am ready--and

not afraid!"



Then he sent this cablegram to his father:



"Escaped unhurt from burning hotel.  Have taken fictitious name.

Goodbye."



During the, evening while he was wandering about in one of the outlying

districts of the city, he came across a small brick church, with a bill

posted there with these words printed on it: "MECHANICS' CLUB DEBATE.

ALL INVITED."  He saw people, apparently mainly of the working class,

entering the place, and he followed and took his seat.  It was a humble

little church, quite bare as to ornamentation.  It had painted pews

without cushions, and no pulpit, properly speaking, but it had a

platform.  On the platform sat the chairman, and by his side sat a man

who held a manuscript in his hand and had the waiting look of one who is

going to perform the principal part.  The church was soon filled with a

quiet and orderly congregation of decently dressed and modest people.

This is what the chairman said:



"The essayist for this evening is an old member of our club whom you all

know, Mr.  Parker, assistant editor of the Daily Democrat.  The subject

of his essay is the American Press, and he will use as his text a couple

of paragraphs taken from Mr. Matthew Arnold's new book.  He asks me to

read these texts for him.  The first is as follows:



"'Goethe says somewhere that "the thrill of awe," that is to say,

REVERENCE, is the best thing humanity has."



"Mr. Arnold's other paragraph is as follows:



"'I should say that if one were searching for the best means to efface

and kill in a whole nation the discipline of respect, one could not do

better than take the American newspapers."



Mr.  Parker rose and bowed, and was received with warm applause.  He then

began to read in a good round resonant voice, with clear enunciation and

careful attention to his pauses and emphases.  His points were received

with approval as he went on.



The essayist took the position that the most important function of a

public journal in any country was the propagating of national feeling and

pride in the national name--the keeping the people "in love with their

country and its institutions, and shielded from the allurements of alien

and inimical systems."  He sketched the manner in which the reverent

Turkish or Russian journalist fulfilled this function--the one assisted

by the prevalent "discipline of respect" for the bastinado, the other for

Siberia.  Continuing, he said:



The chief function of an English journal is that of all other journals

the world over: it must keep the public eye fixed admiringly upon certain

things, and keep it diligently diverted from certain others.  For

instance, it must keep the public eye fixed admiringly upon the glories

of England, a processional splendor stretching its receding line down the

hazy vistas of time, with the mellowed lights of a thousand years

glinting from its banners; and it must keep it diligently diverted from

the fact that all these glories were for the enrichment and

aggrandizement of the petted and privileged few, at cost of the blood and

sweat and poverty of the unconsidered masses who achieved them but might

not enter in and partake of them.  It must keep the public eye fixed in

loving and awful reverence upon the throne as a sacred thing, and

diligently divert it from the fact that no throne was ever set up by the

unhampered vote of a majority of any nation; and that hence no throne

exists that has a right to exist, and no symbol of it, flying from any

flagstaff, is righteously entitled to wear any device but the skull and

crossbones of that kindred industry which differs from royalty only

business-wise--merely as retail differs from wholesale.  It must keep the

citizen's eye fixed in reverent docility upon that curious invention of

machine politics, an Established Church, and upon that bald contradiction

of common justice, a hereditary nobility; and diligently divert it from

the fact that the one damns him if he doesn't wear its collar, and robs

him under the gentle name of taxation whether he wears it or not, and the

other gets all the honors while he does all the work.



The essayist thought that Mr.  Arnold, with his trained eye and

intelligent observation, ought to have perceived that the very quality

which he so regretfully missed from our press--respectfulness, reverence

--was exactly the thing which would make our press useless to us if it

had it--rob it of the very thing which differentiates it from all other

journalism in the world and makes it distinctively and preciously

American, its frank and cheerful irreverence being by all odds the most

valuable of all its qualities.  "For its mission--overlooked by Mr.

Arnold--is to stand guard over a nation's liberties, not its humbugs and

shams."  He thought that if during fifty years the institutions of the

old world could be exposed to the fire of a flouting and scoffing press

like ours, "monarchy and its attendant crimes would disappear from

Christendom."  Monarchists might doubt this; then "why not persuade the

Czar to give it a trial in Russia?"  Concluding, he said:



Well, the charge is, that our press has but little of that old world

quality, reverence.  Let us be candidly grateful that it is so.  With its

limited reverence it at least reveres the things which this nation

reveres, as a rule, and that is sufficient: what other people revere is

fairly and properly matter of light importance to us.  Our press does not

reverence kings, it does not reverence so called nobilities, it does not

reverence established ecclesiastical slaveries, it does not reverence

laws which rob a younger son to fatten an elder one, it does not

reverence any fraud or sham or infamy, howsoever old or rotten or holy,

which sets one citizen above his neighbor by accident of birth: it does

not reverence any law or custom, howsoever old or decayed or sacred,

which shuts against the best man in the land the best place in the land

and the divine right to prove property and go up and occupy it.  In the

sense of the poet Goethe--that meek idolater of provincial three carat

royalty and nobility--our press is certainly bankrupt in the "thrill of

awe"--otherwise reverence; reverence for nickel plate and brummagem.

Let us sincerely hope that this fact will remain a fact forever: for to

my mind a discriminating irreverence is the creator and protector of

human liberty--even as the other thing is the creator, nurse, and

steadfast protector of all forms of human slavery, bodily and mental.



Tracy said to himself, almost shouted to himself, "I'm glad I came to

this country.  I was right.  I was right to seek out a land where such

healthy principles and theories are in men's hearty and minds.  Think of

the innumerable slaveries imposed by misplaced reverence!  How well he

brought that out, and how true it is.  There's manifestly prodigious

force in reverence.  If you can get a man to reverence your ideals, he's

your slave.  Oh, yes, in all the ages the peoples of Europe have been

diligently taught to avoid reasoning about the shams of monarchy and

nobility, been taught to avoid examining them, been taught to reverence

them; and now, as a natural result, to reverence them is second nature.

In order to shock them it is sufficient to inject a thought of the

opposite kind into their dull minds.  For ages, any expression of

so-called irreverence from their lips has been sin and crime.  The sham

and swindle of all this is apparent the moment one reflects that he is

himself the only legitimately qualified judge of what is entitled to

reverence and what is not.  Come, I hadn't thought of that before, but

it is true, absolutely true.  What right has Goethe, what right has

Arnold, what right has any dictionary, to define the word Irreverence

for me? What their ideals are is nothing to me.  So long as I reverence

my own ideals my whole duty is done, and I commit no profanation if I

laugh at theirs.  I may scoff at other people's ideals as much as I want

to.  It is my right and my privilege.  No man has any right to deny it."



Tracy was expecting to hear the essay debated, but this did not happen.

The chairman said, by way of explanation:



"I would say, for the information of the strangers present here, that in

accordance with our custom the subject of this meeting will be debated at

the next meeting of the club.  This is in order to enable our members to

prepare what they may wish to say upon the subject with pen and paper,

for we are mainly mechanics and unaccustomed to speaking.  We are obliged

to write down what we desire to say."



Many brief papers were now read, and several offhand speeches made in

discussion of the essay read at the last meeting of the club, which had

been a laudation, by some visiting professor, of college culture, and the

grand results flowing from it to the nation.  One of the papers was read

by a man approaching middle age, who said he hadn't had a college

education, that he had got his education in a printing office, and had

graduated from there into the patent office, where he had been a clerk

now for a great many years.  Then he continued to this effect:



The essayist contrasted the America of to-day with the America of bygone

times, and certainly the result is the exhibition of a mighty progress.

But I think he a little overrated the college-culture share in the

production of that result.  It can no doubt be easily shown that the

colleges have contributed the intellectual part of this progress,

and that that part is vast; but that the material progress has been

immeasurably vaster, I think you will concede.  Now I have been looking

over a list of inventors--the creators of this amazing material

development--and I find that they were not college-bred men.  Of course

there are exceptions--like Professor Henry of Princeton, the inventor of

Mr. Morse's system of telegraphy--but these exceptions are few.  It is

not overstatement to say that the imagination-stunning material

development of this century, the only century worth living in since time

itself was invented, is the creation of men not college-bred.  We think

we see what these inventors have done: no, we see only the visible vast

frontage of their work; behind it is their far vaster work, and it is

invisible to the careless glance.  They have reconstructed this nation--

made it over, that is--and metaphorically speaking, have multiplied its

numbers almost beyond the power of figures to express.  I will explain

what I mean.  What constitutes the population of a land?  Merely the

numberable packages of meat and bones in it called by courtesy men and

women?  Shall a million ounces of brass and a million ounces of gold be

held to be of the same value?  Take a truer standard: the measure of a

man's contributing capacity to his time and his people--the work he can

do--and then number the population of this country to-day, as multiplied

by what a man can now do, more than his grandfather could do.  By this

standard of measurement, this nation, two or three generations ago,

consisted of mere cripples, paralytics, dead men, as compared with the

men of to-day.  In 1840 our population was 17,000,000.  By way of rude

but striking illustration, let us consider, for argument's sake, that

four of these millions consisted of aged people, little children, and

other incapables, and that the remaining 13,000,000 were divided and

employed as follows:



2,000,000 as ginners of cotton.

6,000,000 (women) as stocking-knitters.

2,000,000 (women) as thread-spinners.

500,000 as screw makers.

400,000 as reapers, binders, etc.

1,000,000 as corn shellers.

40,000 as weavers.

1,000 as stitchers of shoe soles.



Now the deductions which I am going to append to these figures may sound

extravagant, but they are not.  I take them from Miscellaneous Documents

No. 50, second session 45th Congress, and they are official and

trustworthy.  To-day, the work of those 2,000,000 cotton-ginners is done

by 2,000 men; that of the 6,000,000 stocking-knitters is done by 3,000

boys; that of the 2,000,000 thread-spinners is done by 1,000 girls; that

of the 500,000 screw makers is done by 500 girls; that of the 400,000

reapers, binders, etc., is done by 4,000 boys; that of the 1,000,000 corn

shelters is done by 7,500 men; that of the 40,000 weavers is done by

1,200 men; and that of the 1,000 stitchers of shoe soles is done by

6 men.  To bunch the figures, 17,900 persons to-day do the above-work,

whereas fifty years ago it would have taken thirteen millions of persons

to do it.  Now then, how many of that ignorant race--our fathers and

grandfathers--with their ignorant methods, would it take to do our work

to-day?  It would take forty thousand millions--a hundred times the

swarming population of China--twenty times the present population of the

globe.  You look around you and you see a nation of sixty millions--

apparently; but secreted in their hands and brains, and invisible to your

eyes, is the true population of this Republic, and it numbers forty

billions!  It is the stupendous creation of those humble unlettered,

un-college-bred inventors--all honor to their name.



"How grand that is!" said Tracy, as he wended homeward.  "What a

civilization it is, and what prodigious results these are! and brought

about almost wholly by common men; not by Oxford-trained aristocrats,

but men who stand shoulder to shoulder in the humble ranks of life and

earn the bread that they eat.  Again, I'm glad I came.  I have found a

country at last where one may start fair, and breast to breast with his

fellow man, rise by his own efforts, and be something in the world and be

proud of that something; not be something created by an ancestor three

hundred years ago."









CHAPTER XI.



During the first few days he kept the fact diligently before his mind

that he was in a land where there was "work and bread for all."  In fact,

for convenience' sake he fitted it to a little tune and hummed it to

himself; but as time wore on the fact itself began to take on a doubtful

look, and next the tune got fatigued and presently ran down and stopped.

His first effort was to get an upper clerkship in one of the departments,

where his Oxford education could come into play and do him service.

But he stood no chance whatever.  There, competency was no

recommendation; political backing, without competency, was worth six of

it.  He was glaringly English, and that was necessarily against him in

the political centre of a nation where both parties prayed for the Irish

cause on the house-top and blasphemed it in the cellar.  By his dress he

was a cowboy; that won him respect--when his back was not turned--but it

couldn't get a clerkship for him.  But he had said, in a rash moment,

that he would wear those clothes till the owner or the owner's friends

caught sight of them and asked for that money, and his conscience would

not let him retire from that engagement now.



At the end of a week things were beginning to wear rather a startling

look.  He had hunted everywhere for work, descending gradually the scale

of quality, until apparently he had sued for all the various kinds of

work a man without a special calling might hope to be able to do, except

ditching and the other coarse manual sorts--and had got neither work nor

the promise of it.



He was mechanically turning over the leaves of his diary, meanwhile, and

now his eye fell upon the first record made after he was burnt out:



"I myself did not doubt my stamina before, nobody could doubt it now, if

they could see how I am housed, and realise that I feel absolutely no

disgust with these quarters, but am as serenely content with them as any

dog would be in a similar kennel.  Terms, twenty-five dollars a week.

I said I would start at the bottom.  I have kept my word."



A shudder went quaking through him, and he exclaimed:



"What have I been thinking of!  This the bottom!  Mooning along a whole

week, and these terrific expenses climbing and climbing all the time!

I must end this folly straightway."



He settled up at once and went forth to find less sumptuous lodgings.  He

had to wander far and seek with diligence, but he succeeded.  They made

him pay in advance--four dollars and a half; this secured both bed and

food for a week.  The good-natured, hardworked landlady took him up three

flights of narrow, uncarpeted stairs and delivered him into his room.

There were two double-bedsteads in it, and one single one.  He would be

allowed to sleep alone in one of the double beds until some new boarder

should come, but he wouldn't be charged extra.



So he would presently be required to sleep with some stranger!

The thought of it made him sick.  Mrs.  Marsh, the landlady, was very

friendly and hoped he would like her house--they all liked it, she said.



"And they're a very nice set of boys.  They carry on a good deal, but

that's their fun.  You see, this room opens right into this back one,

and sometimes they're all in one and sometimes in the other; and hot

nights they all sleep on the roof when it don't rain.  They get out there

the minute it's hot enough.  The season's so early that they've already

had a night or two up there.  If you'd like to go up and pick out a

place, you can.  You'll find chalk in the side of the chimney where

there's a brick wanting.  You just take the chalk and--but of course

you've done it before."



"Oh, no, I haven't."



"Why, of course you haven't--what am I thinking of?  Plenty of room on the

Plains without chalking, I'll be bound.  Well, you just chalk out a place

the size of a blanket anywhere on the tin that ain't already marked off,

you know, and that's your property.  You and your bed-mate take turnabout

carrying up the blanket and pillows and fetching them down again;

or one carries them up and the other fetches them down, you fix it the

way you like, you know.  You'll like the boys, they're everlasting

sociable--except the printer.  He's the one that sleeps in that single

bed--the strangest creature; why, I don't believe you could get that man

to sleep with another man, not if the house was afire.  Mind you, I'm not

just talking, I know.  The boys tried him, to see.  They took his bed out

one night, and so when he got home about three in the morning--he was on

a morning paper then, but he's on an evening one now--there wasn't any

place for him but with the iron-moulder; and if you'll believe me, he

just set up the rest of the night--he did, honest.  They say he's

cracked, but it ain't so, he's English--they're awful particular.

You won't mind my saying that.  You--you're English?"



"Yes."



"I thought so.  I could tell it by the way you mispronounce the words

that's got a's in them, you know; such as saying loff when you mean laff

--but you'll get over that.  He's a right down good fellow, and a little

sociable with the photographer's boy and the caulker and the blacksmith

that work in the navy yard, but not so much with the others.  The fact

is, though it's private, and the others don't know it, he's a kind of an

aristocrat, his father being a doctor, and you know what style that is--

in England, I mean, because in this country a doctor ain't so very much,

even if he's that.  But over there of course it's different.  So this

chap had a falling out with his father, and was pretty high strung, and

just cut for this country, and the first he knew he had to get to work or

starve.  Well, he'd been to college, you see, and so he judged he was all

right--did you say anything?"



"No--I only sighed."



"And there's where he was mistaken.  Why, he mighty near starved.  And I

reckon he would have starved sure enough, if some jour' printer or other

hadn't took pity on him and got him a place as apprentice.  So he learnt

the trade, and then he was all right--but it was a close call.  Once he

thought he had got to haul in his pride and holler for his father and--

why, you're sighing again.  Is anything the matter with you?--does my

clatter--"



"Oh, dear--no.  Pray go on--I like it."



"Yes, you see, he's been over here ten years; he's twenty-eight, now,

and he ain't pretty well satisfied in his mind, because he can't get

reconciled to being a mechanic and associating with mechanics, he being,

as he says to me, a gentleman, which is a pretty plain letting-on that

the boys ain't, but of course I know enough not to let that cat out of

the bag."



"Why--would there be any harm in it?"



"Harm in it?  They'd lick him, wouldn't they?  Wouldn't you?  Of course

you would.  Don't you ever let a man say you ain't a gentleman in this

country.  But laws, what am I thinking about?  I reckon a body would

think twice before he said a cowboy wasn't a gentleman."



A trim, active, slender and very pretty girl of about eighteen walked

into the room now, in the most satisfied and unembarrassed way.  She was

cheaply but smartly and gracefully dressed, and the mother's quick glance

at the stranger's face as he rose, was of the kind which inquires what

effect has been produced, and expects to find indications of surprise and

admiration.



"This is my daughter Hattie--we call her Puss.  It's the new boarder,

Puss."  This without rising.



The young Englishman made the awkward bow common to his nationality and

time of life in circumstances of delicacy and difficulty, and these were

of that sort; for, being taken by surprise, his natural, lifelong self

sprang to the front, and that self of course would not know just how to

act when introduced to a chambermaid, or to the heiress of a mechanics'

boarding house.  His other self--the self which recognized the equality

of all men--would have managed the thing better, if it hadn't been caught

off guard and robbed of its chance.  The young girl paid no attention to

the bow, but put out her hand frankly and gave the stranger a friendly

shake and said:



"How do you do?"



Then she marched to the one washstand in the room, tilted her head this

way and that before the wreck of a cheap mirror that hung above it,

dampened her fingers with her tongue, perfected the circle of a little

lock of hair that was pasted against her forehead, then began to busy

herself with the slops.



"Well, I must be going--it's getting towards supper time.  Make yourself

at home, Mr.  Tracy, you'll hear the bell when it's ready."



The landlady took her tranquil departure, without commanding either of

the young people to vacate the room.  The young man wondered a little

that a mother who seemed so honest and respectable should be so

thoughtless, and was reaching for his hat, intending to disembarrass the

girl of his presence; but she said:



"Where are you going?"



"Well--nowhere in particular, but as I am only in the way here--"



"Why, who said you were in the way?  Sit down--I'll move you when you are

in the way."



She was making the beds, now.  He sat down and watched her deft and

diligent performance.



"What gave you that notion?  Do you reckon I need a whole room just to

make up a bed or two in?"



"Well no, it wasn't that, exactly.  We are away up here in an empty

house, and your mother being gone--"



The girl interrupted him with an amused laugh, and said:



"Nobody to protect me?  Bless you, I don't need it.  I'm not afraid.

I might be if I was alone, because I do hate ghosts, and I don't deny it.

Not that I believe in them, for I don't.  I'm only just afraid of them."



"How can you be afraid of them if you don't believe in them?"



"Oh, I don't know the how of it--that's too many for me; I only know it's

so.  It's the same with Maggie Lee."



"Who is that?"



"One of the boarders; young lady that works in the factry."



"She works in a factory?"



"Yes.  Shoe factory."



"In a shoe factory; and you call her a young lady?"



"Why, she's only twenty-two; what should you call her?"



"I wasn't thinking of her age, I was thinking of the title.  The fact is,

I came away from England to get away from artificial forms--for

artificial forms suit artificial people only--and here you've got them

too.  I'm sorry.  I hoped you had only men and women; everybody equal;

no differences in rank."



The girl stopped with a pillow in her teeth and the case spread open

below it, contemplating him from under her brows with a slightly puzzled

expression.  She released the pillow and said:



"Why, they are all equal.  Where's any difference in rank?"



"If you call a factory girl a young lady, what do you call the

President's wife?"



"Call her an old one."



"Oh, you make age the only distinction?"



"There ain't any other to make as far as I can see."



"Then all women are ladies?"



"Certainly they are.  All the respectable ones."



"Well, that puts a better face on it.  Certainly there is no harm in a

title when it is given to everybody.  It is only an offense and a wrong

when it is restricted to a favored few.  But Miss--er--"



"Hattie."



"Miss Hattie, be frank; confess that that title isn't accorded by

everybody to everybody.  The rich American doesn't call her cook a lady--

isn't that so?"



"Yes, it's so.  What of it?"



He was surprised and a little disappointed, to see that his admirable

shot had produced no perceptible effect.



"What of it?" he said.  "Why this: equality is not conceded here, after

all, and the Americans are no better off than the English.  In fact

there's no difference."



"Now what an idea.  There's nothing in a title except what is put into

it--you've said that yourself.  Suppose the title is 'clean,' instead of

'lady.'  You get that?"



"I believe so.  Instead of speaking of a woman as a lady, you substitute

clean and say she's a clean person."



"That's it.  In England the swell folks don't speak of the working people

as gentlemen and ladies?"



"Oh, no."



"And the working people don't call themselves gentlemen and ladies?"



"Certainly not."



"So if you used the other word there wouldn't be any change.  The swell

people wouldn't call anybody but themselves 'clean,' and those others

would drop sort of meekly into their way of talking and they wouldn't

call themselves clean.  We don't do that way here.  Everybody calls

himself a lady or gentleman, and thinks he is, and don't care what

anybody else thinks him, so long as he don't say it out loud.  You think

there's no difference.  You knuckle down and we don't.  Ain't that a

difference?"



"It is a difference I hadn't thought of; I admit that.  Still--calling

one's self a lady doesn't--er--"



"I wouldn't go on if I were you."



Howard Tracy turned his head to see who it might be that had introduced

this remark.  It was a short man about forty years old, with sandy hair,

no beard, and a pleasant face badly freckled but alive and intelligent,

and he wore slop-shop clothing which was neat but showed wear.  He had

come from the front room beyond the hall, where he had left his hat, and

he had a chipped and cracked white wash-bowl in his hand.  The girl came

and took the bowl.



"I'll get it for you.  You go right ahead and give it to him, Mr.

Barrow.  He's the new boarder--Mr. Tracy--and I'd just got to where it

was getting too deep for me."



"Much obliged if you will, Hattie.  I was coming to borrow of the boys."

He sat down at his ease on an old trunk, and said, "I've been listening

and got interested; and as I was saying, I wouldn't go on, if I were you.

You see where you are coming to, don't you?  Calling yourself a lady

doesn't elect you; that is what you were going to say; and you saw that

if you said it you were going to run right up against another difference

that you hadn't thought of: to-wit, Whose right is it to do the electing?

Over there, twenty thousand people in a million elect themselves

gentlemen and ladies, and the nine hundred and eighty thousand accept

that decree and swallow the affront which it puts upon them.  Why, if

they didn't accept it, it wouldn't be an election, it would be a dead

letter and have no force at all.  Over here the twenty thousand would-be

exclusives come up to the polls and vote themselves to be ladies and

gentlemen.  But the thing doesn't stop there.  The nine hundred and

eighty thousand come and vote themselves to be ladies and gentlemen too,

and that elects the whole nation.  Since the whole million vote

themselves ladies and gentlemen, there is no question about that

election.  It does make absolute equality, and there is no fiction about

it; while over yonder the inequality, (by decree of the infinitely

feeble, and consent of the infinitely strong,) is also absolute--as real

and absolute as our equality."



Tracy had shrunk promptly into his English shell when this speech began,

notwithstanding he had now been in severe training several weeks for

contact and intercourse with the common herd on the common herd's terms;

but he lost no time in pulling himself out again, and so by the time the

speech was finished his valves were open once more, and he was forcing

himself to accept without resentment the common herd's frank fashion of

dropping sociably into other people's conversations unembarrassed and

uninvited.  The process was not very difficult this time, for the man's

smile and voice and manner were persuasive and winning.  Tracy would even

have liked him on the spot, but for the fact--fact which he was not

really aware of--that the equality of men was not yet a reality to him,

it was only a theory; the mind perceived, but the man failed to feel it.

It was Hattie's ghost over again, merely turned around.  Theoretically

Barrow was his equal, but it was distinctly distasteful to see him

exhibit it.  He presently said:



"I hope in all sincerity that what you have said is true, as regards the

Americans, for doubts have crept into my mind several times.  It seemed

that the equality must be ungenuine where the sign-names of castes were

still in vogue; but those sign-names have certainly lost their offence

